A Course in” 3, Contemporary Textbook 2#2 } et pede ed Fe ee de eee Py Mandarin Training Center National Taiwan Normal University ES Ac nm fee ae Caceres gesCi pede LO eee lob te. 2 Tha Mandarin Training Center National Taiwan Normal University Bs Agee So Cee eae teesSBR AZ DBAS Pp ORM 1956 F> LEBEL REA MERE KE RA RL 2A Pe REA ET AZUL SE SERAUR-BAtRA ESRBAHA ROELBRA’ ZARB FBR APs B 1967 HR sR USHA MBRTRARH AEBASRAABLRBES HAL MASRALEAMLATEFZA RVEERRPRARTRHN SE MBCS HR E ROME ° Atk APS BB ERIE APR RASEB FEMME CSERPRRE) OM UFSRNPEBAS HER PRILEE BE ae he ° A TREMARE BES DERE EELAE OME RES AP COBH Keep BRR > BM af Bl Hf SB > BB HE AS T HBAS RY SE ES ARE E> FAR 8 BAF F-REMETNEGE > tbhAH BARA > RE RBA AE Oh A ROR RE LED eh AT TR CER R Riz) MBAs RAP CEGKTEREREERRARMEOEMERM: RATHI HAIRS BIR HE He 3H B] A Bl ob Claudia Ross Ad > GE BAIR RIR BFA HERAR] > ikke T BB OO RBA AIR ABO) wei PAIR AM OBI AGE > HEB ERA PHARRBASL BAR Fo ZUR SB th Bh © 34) 0 BBE OO GE ILM AARP CREB MBS Pes ATT — 4-3 HA; BOAO Rob. SERA tow PAS TAMRSARM MH FTER> Fh oy BZ bi T BRIER > AMARA o BOTA TE RP FH Rd oH RS PROBE > MORN OSARAE > KRIGPRZRKRER DWH E ° Fe He GH Ee AA AE RE ALR) ABER AM SH UE OR HRA > thy Bh BAP HE SAK AT VAR AE oh OYE RAZ > CSRPLRE) FRRKEEIN-BEA GRAMM > PREM MRE OB PE Reo RIGA AR AR: SHRI LS OAM MAM RS bt) BERS > MRS Rabo AUR © » 7 8 TB ES RAG DBAS PCEE RRThe Mandarin Training Center (MTC) at National Taiwan Normal University (NTNU) was established in 1956, and is the oldest, most comprehensive, and most pedagogically effective educational institute of its kind in Taiwan. Every year over 3,000 international students are trained at MTC, and to the present day over 50,000 students representing more than 120 countries have walked through its doors, solidifying international renown. MTC started producing teaching material in 1967, and has since completed over 50 textbooks, making it a frontrunner in the field of teaching Chinese as a second language. As the core books have been in circulation for 15 years already, many students and teachers agree that updates are in order, and that new materials should be made to meet the modern demand. Changes in the social landscape, improved teaching methods, and innovations in educational media are what prompted the production of MTC’s six-volume series, A Course in Contemporary Chinese. The project responds to Chinese teaching needs both at home and abroad, and bolsters Taiwan’s brand of teaching material for Chinese as a second language. With the goal of integrating theory and practice, and carrying forward the spirit of teaching Chinese as a second language, MTC petitioned one of the field’s most esteemed professors, Shou-Hsin Teng, to serve as chief editor. A Course in Contemporary Chinese has been compiled and edited under his leadership, together with the help of 18 seasoned Chinese teachers and the following four executive editors: Associate Research Fellow Liping Chang, Tai-chi Chang, and Ru-pei Cai and Wen-wen Chang of the MTC teaching material development division. MTC is presenting this brand new core material after half a century’s worth of educational experience, and we have taken extra care to ensure it is of uncompromised quality. We were delighted to have American professors Claudia Ross, Jianhua Bai , and Yea-fen Chen act as consultants, Professor Teh-Ming Yeh from Taiwan, Professor Tao-chung Yao from the U.S., and Professor Xun Liu from China on the review committee, and professors Ying Cherry Li and Yung-O Biq of NTNU’s English department help with the respective translation of vocabulary and grammar points. The material was first trialed at MTC and other language centers around Taiwan for a year. The current version underwent numerous drafts, and materialized under the careful guidance of the consultants, a sedulous reading from the review committee, and feedback from teachers and students. As for the editorial process, we owe the greatest thanks to the indefatigable editorial team, the professors and their invaluable input, and the teachers and students who were willing to trial the book. An additional and special thanks is due to Linking Publishing Company, who put forth utmost effort and professionalism in publishing this set of teaching material, allowing us to deliver a publication of superior quality. It is our hope that 4 Course in Contemporary Chinese is not merely a practical set of teaching materials for students, but also enriching for teachers and the entire teaching experience. We welcome comments from instructors who have put the books into practice so that we can continue improving the material. Only then can we keep furthering our contribution to the field of teaching Chinese as a second language, both in Taiwan and abroad. Hao Jan Chen Director of the Mandarin Training Center National Taiwan Normal UniversityFinally, after more than two years, volume one of our six-volume project is seeing the light of day. The language used in A Course in Contemporary Chinese is up to date, and though there persists a deep ‘generation gap’ between it and my own brand of Chinese, this is as it should be. In addition to myself, our project team has consisted of 18 veteran MTC teachers and the entire staff of the MTC Section of Instructional Materials, plus the MTC Deputy Director. The field of L2 Chinese in Taiwan seems to have adopted the world-famous 'one child policy’. The complete set of currently used textbooks was born a generation ago, and until now has been without predecessor. We are happy to fill this vacancy, and with the title ‘number two’, yet we also aspire to have it be number two in name alone. After a generation, we present a slightly disciplined contemporary language as observed in Taiwan, we employ Hanyu Pinyin without having to justify it cautiously and timidly, we are proud to present a brand-new system of Chinese parts of speech that will hopefully eliminate many instances of error, we have devised two kinds of exercises in our series, one basically structural and the other entirely task-based, each serving its own intended function, and finally we have included in each lesson a special aspect of Chinese culture. Moreover, all this is done in full color, the first time ever in the field of L2 Chinese in Taiwan. The settings for our current series is in Taipei, Taiwan, with events taking place near the National Taiwan Normal University. The six volumes progress from basic colloquial to semi-formal and finally to authentic conversations or narratives. The glossary in vocabulary and grammar is in basically semi-literal English, not free translation, as we wish to guide the readers/learners along the Chinese ‘ways of thinking’, but rest assured that no pidgin English has been used. I am a functional, not structural, linguist, and users of our new textbooks will find our approaches and explanations more down to earth. Both teachers and learners will find that the content resonates with their own experiences and feelings. Rote learning plays but a tiny part of our learning experiences. In a functional frame, the role of the speaker often seen as prominent. This is natural, as numerous adverbs in Chinese, as they are traditionally referred to, do not in fact modify verb phrases at all. They relate to the speaker. We, the field of Chinese as a second language, know a lot about how to teach, especially when it comes to Chinese characters. Most L2 Chinese teachers world-wide are ethnically Chinese, and teach characters just as they were taught in childhood. Truth is, we know next to nothing how adult students/learners actually learn characters, and other elements of the Chinese language. While we have nothing new in this series of textbooks that contributes to the teaching of Chinese characters, I tried to tightly integrate teaching and learning through our presentation of vocabulary items and grammatical structures. Underneath such methodologies is my personal conviction, and at times both instructors’ and learners’ patience is requested. I welcome communication with all users of our new textbooks, whether instructors or students/learners. Shou-hsin Teng IVSeries Introduction This six-volume series is a comprehensive learning material that focuses on spoken language in the first three volumes and written language in the latter three volumes. Volume One aims to strengthen daily conversation and applications; Volume Two contains short essays as supplementary readings; Volume Three introduces beginning-level written language and discourse, in addition to extended dialogues. Volume Four uses discourse to solidify the learner’s written language and ability in reading authentic materials; Volumes Five and Six are arranged in topics such as society, technology, economics, politics, culture, and environment to help the learner expand their language utilizations in different domains. Each volume includes a textbook, a student workbook, and a teacher’s manual. In addition, Volume One and Two include a practice book for characters. Level of Students A Course in Contemporary Chinese (4% P .2R4z) is suitable for learners of Chinese in Taiwan, as well as for high school or college level Chinese language courses overseas. Volumes One to Six cover levels Al to Cl in the CEFR, or Novice to Superior levels in ACTFL Guidelines. Overview . The series adopts communicative language teaching and task-based learning to boost the learner’s Chinese ability. * Each lesson has learning objectives and self-evaluation to give the learner a clear record of tasks completed. * Lessons are authentic daily situations to help the learner learn in natural contexts. ¢ Lexical items and syntactic structures are presented and explained in functional, not structural, perspectives. + Syntactic, i.e. grammatical, explanation includes functions, structures, pragmatics, and drills to guide the learner to proper usage. * Classroom activities have specific learning objectives, activities, or tasks to help fortify learning while having fun. ¢ The “Bits of Chinese Culture” section of the lesson has authentic photographs to give the learner a deeper look at local Taiwanese culture. * Online access provides supplementary materials for teachers & students.Saar 2 a7 Contents Fe Foreword ll = 4%092& — From the Editor’s Desk IV % F\#L4 About the Series Vv 322844 An Introduction to the Chinese Language. ———vilI A@2 G25 — Highlights of Lessons XVIII 33] #8 # Parts of Speech in Chinese XXIV 22% 23 — Classroom Phrases XXv A494) % Introduction to Characters XXVI 5 RRR EM | 1 _tesson’ | Welcome to Taiwan! i: RARA 23 Lesson 2 My Family c= TRB BE? 43 Lesson 3 What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? ee) MHS SR? 65 Eesson Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? 2 ASG Bates, 85 Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious © a a ° 3 a fee Py Bee Lb 103 Lesson 6 Their School Is Up in the Mountains rs ps ViStee ewe wees ete ee eee ee eee oo) FELASA KTV 131 Going to KTV at 9 O'clock in the Morning (es) EKX#HEEA 159 essone Taking a Train to Tainan | BARE AMEE ? 181 Lesson | Where Will You Go for the Holidays? BPE AK RARE OS 201 The Fruit in Taiwan Tastes Really Good oo) RBBB 223 I Would Like to Rent a Place ca Ute BIB ES AGP x? 245 How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? eee LARS ~ {_Lesson 13 Happy Birthday ame RAE | “ It’s So Cold! EET ARAM es _Lesson15 | [ Don’t Feel Well ee Appendix I. 433 #4] Vocabulary Index (Chinese-English) —— 351 Il. 4423] 24] Vocabulary Index (English-Chinese) - 359 Il. 5 #2 4 22 3c #SF Text in Simplified Characters 368 vilChina is a multi-ethnic society, and when people in general study Chinese, ‘Chinese’ usually refers to the Beijing variety of the language as spoken by the Han people in China, also known as Mandarin Chinese or simply Mandarin. It is the official language of China, known mostly domestically as the Putonghua, the lingua franca, or Hanyu, the Han language. In Taiwan, Guoyu refers to the national/official language, and Huayu to either Mandarin Chinese as spoken by Chinese descendants residing overseas, or to Mandarin when taught to non-Chinese learners. The following pages present an outline of the features and properties of Chinese. For further details, readers are advised to consult various and rich on-line resources. Language Kinship Languages in the world are grouped together on the basis of language affiliation, called language-family. Chinese, or rather Hanyu, is a member of the Sino- Tibetan family, which covers most of China today, plus parts of Southeast Asia. Therefore, Tibetan, Burmese, and Thai are genetically related to Hanyu. Hanyu is spoken in about 75% of the present Chinese territory, by about 75% of the total Chinese population, and it covers 7 major dialects, including the better known Cantonese, Hokkienese, Hakka and Shanghainese. Historically, Chinese has interacted highly actively with neighboring but unaffiliated languages, such as Japanese, Korean and Vietnamese. The interactions took place in such areas as vocabulary items, phonological structures, a few grammatical features and most importantly the writing script. Typological Features of Chinese Languages in the world are also grouped together on the basis of language characteristics, called language typology. Chinese has the following typological traits, which highlight the dissimilarities between Chinese and English. A. Chinese is a non-tense language. Tense is a grammatical device such that the verb changes according to the time of the event in relation to the time of utterance. Thus ‘He talks nonsense’ refers to his habit, while ‘He talked nonsense’ refers to a time in the past when he behaved that way, but he does not necessarily do that all the time. ‘Talked’ then is a verb in the past tense. Chinese does not operate with this device but marks the time of events with time expressions such as ‘today’ or ‘tomorrow’ in the sentence. The verb remains the same regardless of time of happening. This type of language is labeled as an atensal language, while English and most European languages are tensal languages. Knowing this particular trait can help European learners of Chinese avoid mistakes to do with verbs in Chinese. Thus, in responding to ‘What did you do in China last year?’ Chinese is ‘I teach English (last year)’; and to ‘What are you doing now in Japan?’ Chinese is again ‘I teach English (now)’. B. Nouns in Chinese are not directly countable. Nouns in English are either countable, e.g. 2 candies, or non-countable, e.g. *2 salts, while all nouns in Chinese are non-countable. When they are to be counted, a measure, villor called classifier, must be used between a noun and a number, e.g. 2-piece-candy. Thus, Chinese is a classifier language. Only non-countable nouns in English are used with measures, e.g. a drop of water. Therefore it is imperative to learn nouns in Chinese together with their associated measures/classifiers. There are only about 30 high-frequency measures/classifiers in Chinese to be mastered at the initial stage of learning. C. Chinese is a Topic-Prominent language. Sentences in Chinese quite often begin with somebody or something that is being talked about, rather than the subject of the verb in the sentence. This item is called a topic in linguistics. Most Asian languages employ topic, while most European languages employ subject. The following bad English sentences, sequenced below per frequency of usage, illustrate the topic structures in Chinese. *Senator Kennedy, people in Europe also respected. *Seafood, Taiwanese people love lobsters best. *President Obama, he attended Harvard University. Because of this feature, Chinese people tend to speak ‘broken’ English, whereas English speakers tend to sound ‘complete’, if bland and alien, when they talk in Chinese. Through practice and through keen observations of what motivates the use of a topic in Chinese, this feature of Chinese can be acquired eventually. D. Chinese tends to drop things in the sentence. The ‘broken’ tendencies mentioned above also include not using nouns in a sentence where English counterparts are ‘complete’. This tendency is called dropping, as illustrated below through bad English sentences. Are you coming tomorrow? ----- *Come! What did you buy? ----- *Buy some jeans. *This bicycle, who rides? ----- *My old professor rides. The Ist example drops everything except the verb, the 2nd drops the subject, and the 3rd drops the object. Dropping happens when what is dropped is easily recoverable or identifiable from the contexts or circumstances. Not doing this, Europeans are often commented upon that their sentences in Chinese are too often inundated with unwanted pronouns!! Phonological Characteristics of Chinese Phonology refers to the system of sound, the pronunciation, of a language. To untrained ears, Chinese language sounds unfamiliar, sort of alien in a way. This is due to the fact that Chinese sound system contains some elements that are not part of the sound systems of European languages, though commonly found on the Asian continent. These features will be explained below. IxOn the whole, the Chinese sound system is not really very complicated. It has 7 vowels, 5 of which are found in English (i, e, a, 0, u), plus 2 which are not (-e,); and it has 21 consonants, 15 of which are quite common, plus 6 which are less common (zh, ch, sh, r, z, c). And Chinese has a fairly simple syllable shape, i.e. consonant + vowel plus possible nasals (n or ng). What is most striking to English speakers is that every syllable in Chinese has a ‘tone’, as will be detailed directly below. But, a word on the sound representation, the pinyin system, first. A. Hanyu Pinyin. Hanyu Pinyin is a variety of Romanization systems that attempt to represent the sound of Chinese through the use of Roman letters (abc...). Since the end of the 19th century, there have been about half a dozen Chinese Romanization systems, including the Wade-Giles, Guoyu Luomazi, Yale, Hanyu Pinyin, Lin Yutang, and Zhuyin Fuhao Di’ershi, not to mention the German system, the French system etc. Thanks to the consensus of media worldwide, and through the support of the UN, Hanyu Pinyin has become the standard worldwide. Taiwan is probably the only place in the world that does not support nor employ Hanyu Pinyin. Instead, it uses non-Roman symbols to represent the sound, called Zhuyin Fuhao, alias BoPoMoFo (cf. the symbols employed in this volume). Officially, that is. Hanyu Pinyin represents the Chinese sound as follows. b,p,m,f d,t.n,l g,k,h j,q,x zh,ch,sh,r z,¢,s 0,-e,e ai,ei,ao,ou an,en,ang,eng -r,i, uit B. Chinese is a tonal language. A tone refers to the voice pitch contour. Pitch contours are used in many languages, including English, but for different functions in different languages. English uses them to indicate the speaker’s viewpoints, e.g. ‘well’ in different contours may indicate impatience, surprise, doubt etc. Chinese, on the other hand, uses contours to refer to different meanings, words. Pitch contours with different linguistic functions are not transferable from one language to another. Therefore, it would be futile trying to learn Chinese tones by looking for or identifying their contour counterparts in English. Mandarin Chinese has 4 distinct tones, the fewest among all Han dialects, i.e. level, rising, dipping and falling, marked — /“v\, and it has only one tone-change rule, i.e. vv > “Vv, though the conditions for this change are fairly complicated. In addition to the four tones, Mandarin also has one neutral(ized) tone, i.e. + , pronounced short/unstressed, which is derived, historically if not synchronically, from the 4 tones; hence the term neutralized. Again, the conditions and environments for the neutralization are highly complex and cannot be explored in this space. C. Syllable final —r effect (vowel retroflexivisation). The northern variety of Hanyu, esp. in Beijing, is known for its richness in the -r effect at the end of a syllable. For example, ‘flower’ is ‘hua’ in southern China but ‘huar’ in Beijing. Given the prominence of the city Beijing, this sound feature tends to be defined as standard nationwide; but that -r effect is rarely attempted in the south. There do not seem to be rigorous rules governing what can and what cannot take the —r effect. It is thus advised that learners of Chinese resort to rote learning in this case, as probably even native speakers of northern Chinese do. D. Syllables in Chinese do not ‘connect’. ‘Connect’ here refers to the merging of the tail of a syllable with the head of a subsequent syllable, e.g. English pronounces ‘at’ + ‘all’ as ‘at+tall’, ‘did’ +‘you’ as ‘did+dyou’ and ‘that’+‘is’ as ‘that+th’is’. On the other hand, syllables in Chinese are isolated from each other and do not connect in this way. Fortunately, this is not a serious problem for English language learners, as the syllable structures in Chinese are rather limited, and there are not many candidates for this merging. We noted above that Chinese syllables take the form of CV plus possible ‘n’ and ‘ng’. CV does not give rise to connecting, not evenin English; so be extra cautious when a syllable ends with ‘n’ or ‘g’ and a subsequent syllable begins with a V, e.g. MinAo ‘Fujian Province and Macao’. Nobody would understand ‘min+nao’!! E. Retroflexive consonants. ‘Retroflexive’ refers to consonants that are pronounced with the tip of the tongue curled up (-flexive) backwards (retro-). There are altogether 4 such consonants, i.e. zh, ch, sh, and r. The pronunciation of these consonants reveals the geographical origin of native Chinese speakers. Southerners do not have them, merging them with z, c, and s, as is commonly observed in Taiwan. Curling up of the tongue comes in various degrees. Local Beijing dialect is well known for its prominent curling. Imagine curling up the tongue at the beginning of a syllable and curling it up again for the -1 effect!! ! Try ‘zhér-over here’, ‘zhuor-table’ and ‘shuir-water’. On Chinese Grammar ‘Grammar’ refers to the ways and rules of how words are organized into a string that is a sentence in a language. Given the fact that all languages have sentences, and at the same time non-sentences, all languages including Chinese have grammar. In this section, the most salient and important features and issues of Chinese grammar will be presented, but a summary of basic structures, as referenced against English, is given first. A. Similarities in Chinese and English. SVO They sell coffee. Tamen mai kafei. AuxV+ Verb You may sit down! Ni ké zudxia 6! Adj+Noun sour grapes suan putao Preptits Noun at home Zai jia Num+Meas+Noun a piece of cake yi kuai dangao Demons+Noun those students  xué B. Dissimilar structures. RelClause: Noun the book that you bought ni mai de shi VPhrase: PrepPhrase to eat at home zai jia chifan Verb: Adverbial Eat slowly! Manmar chi! Xl6th Sept, 1967 1967 nian 9 yu 6 hao Set: Subset Taipei, Taiwan Taiwan  3 of my friends... w6 de péng you san ge... C. Modifier precedes modified (MPM). This is one of the most important grammatical principles in Chinese. We see it operating actively in the charts given above, so that adjectives come before nouns they modify, relative clauses also come before the nouns they modify, possessives come before nouns (tade dianndo ‘his computer’), auxiliary verbs come before verbs, adverbial phrases before verbs, prepositional phrases come before verbs etc. This principle operates almost without exceptions in Chinese, while in English modifiers sometimes precede and some other times follow the modified. D. Principle of Temporal Sequence (PTS). Components of a sentence in Chinese are lined up in accordance with the sequence of time. This principle operates especially when there is a series of verbs contained within a sentence, or when there is a sentential conjunction. First compare the sequence of ‘units’ of an event in English and that in its Chinese counterpart. Event: David /went to New York/ by train /from Boston/ to see his sister. English: 1 2 3 4 5 Chinese: 1 4 2 3 5 Now in real life, David got on a train, the train departed from Boston, it arrived in New York, and finally he visited his sister. This sequence of units is ‘natural’ time, and the Chinese sentence ‘Dawéi zuo hu cong  When sentences are conjoined, English has various possibilities in organizing the conjunction. First, the scenario. H1N1 hits China badly (event-1), and as a result, many schools were closed (event-2). Now, English has the following possible ways of conjoining to express this, e.g. Many schools were closed, because/since H1N1 hit China badly. (E2+E1) HIN1 hit China badly, so many schools were closed. (E1+E2) As HIN1 hit China badly, many schools were closed. (E1+E2) Whereas the only way of expressing the same in Chinese is E1+E2 when both conjunctions are used (yinwéi... sudyi...), Le. Zhongguo yin H1N1 ganran yanzhong (E1), sudyi xtidud xué zhanshi guanbi (E2). PTS then helps explain why ‘cause’ is always placed before ‘consequence’ in Chinese. PTS is also seen operating in the so-called verb-complement constructions in Chinese, e.g. sha-si ‘kill+dead’, chi-bao ‘eat+full’, da-kii ‘hit+cry’ etc. The verb represents an action that must have happened first before its consequence. xilThere is an interesting group of adjectives in Chinese, namely ‘zao-early’, ‘wan-late’, ‘kuai-fast’, ‘man-slow’, ‘dud-plenty’, and ‘shao-few’, which can be placed either before (as adverbials) or after (as complements) of their associated verbs, e.g. Ni mingtian zao diar lai! (Come earlier tomorrow!) W6 lai zao le. Jinbuqu. (I arrived too early. I could not get in.) When ‘zao’ is placed before the verb ‘lai’, the time of arrival is intended, planned, but when it is placed after, the time of arrival is not pre-planned, maybe accidental. The difference complies with PTS. The same difference holds in the case of the other adjectives in the group, e.g. Qing ni dud mai liangge! (Please get two extra!) W6 miaiduG le. Zaota le! (I bought two too many. Going to be wasted!) ‘Dud’ in the first sentence is going to be pre-planned, a pre-event state, while in the second, it’s a post-event report. Pre-event and post-event states then are naturally taken care of by PTS. Our last set in the group is more complicated. ‘Kuai’ and ‘man’ can refer to amount of time in addition to manner of action, as illustrated below. Ni kuai diar z6u; yao chidao le! (Hurry up and go! You’ll be late (e.g. for work)!) Qing ni zé kuai yidiar! (Please walk faster!) ‘Kuai’ in the first can be glossed as ‘quick, hurry up’ (in as little time as possible after the utterance), while that in the second refers to manner of walking. Similarly, ‘man yidiar zé leave yet’ and ‘zéu man yidiar-walk more slowly’. We have seen in this section the very important role in Chinese grammar played by variations in word-order. European languages exhibit rich resources in changing the forms of verbs, adjectives and nouns, and Chinese, like other Asian languages, takes great advantage of word-order. E. Where to find subjects in existential sentences. Existential sentences refer to sentences in which the verbs express appearing (e.g. coming), disappearing (e.g. going) and presence (e.g. written (on the wall)). The existential verbs are all intransitive, and thus they are all associated with a subject, without any objects naturally. This type of sentences deserves a mention in this introduction, as they exhibit a unique structure in Chinese. When their subjects are in definite reference (something that can be referred to, e.g. pronouns and nouns with definite article in English) the subject appears at the front of the sentence, i.e. before the existential verb, but when their subjects are in indefinite reference (nothing in particular), the subject appears after the verb. Compare the following pair of sentences in Chinese against their counterparts in English.  dou 1ai le. Chifan ba! (All the guests we invited have arrived. Let’s serve the dinner.) Duibugqi! Laiwan le. Jiali laile yi ge ké (Sorry for being late! I had an (unexpected) guest.) More examples of post-verbal subjects are given below. Zhe ci tai sile bu shdo rén (Quite a few people died during the typhoon this time.) Zuotian wanshang xidle dudjiti de yi? (How long did it rain last night?) Zuotian wanshang paole ji ge  (How many inmates got away last night?) xill li zudle dudshao rén a? (How many people were in the car?) Exactly when to place the existential subject after the verb will remain a challenge for learners of Chinese for quite a significant period of time. Again, observe and deduce!! Memorising sentence by sentence would not help!! The existential subjects presented above are simple enough, e.g. people, a guest, rain and inmates. But when the subject is complex, further complications emerge!! A portion of the complex subject stays in front of the verb, and the remaining goes to the back of the verb, e.g. Mingtian nimen qu jige rén (How many of you will be going tomorrow?) W6 zuijin didole bu shao toufa. (I lost=fell quite a lot of hair recently.) Qunian  ta sile san ge gé (He lost=died 3 brothers during the earthquake last year.) In linguistics, we say that existential sentences in Chinese have a lot of semantic and information structures involved. F. A tripartite system of verb classifications in Chinese. English has a clear division between verbs and adjectives, but the boundary in Chinese is quite blurred, which quite seriously misleads English-speaking learners of Chinese. The error in *W6 jintian shi mang. ‘I am busy today.’ is a daily observation in Chinese 101! Why is it a common mistake for beginning learners? What do our textbooks and/or teachers do about it, so that the error is discouraged, if not suppressed? Nothing, much! What has not been realized in our profession is that Chinese verb classification is more strongly semantic, rather than more strongly syntactic as in English. Verbs in Chinese have 3 sub-classes, namely Action Verbs, State Verbs and Process Verbs. Action Verbs are time-sensitive activities (beginning and ending, frozen with a snap-shot, prolonged), are will-controlled (consent or refuse), and usually take human subjects, e.g. ‘chi-eat’, ‘mai-buy’ and ‘xué-learn’. State Verbs are non-time-sensitive physical or mental states, inclusive of the all-famous adjectives as a further sub-class, e.g. ‘ai-love’, ‘xitwang-hope’ and ‘liang-bright’. Process Verbs refer to instantaneous change from one state to another, ‘si-die’, ‘pd-break, burst’ and “wan-finish’. The new system of parts of speech in Chinese as adopted in this series is built on this very foundation of this tripartite verb classification. Knowing this new system will be immensely helpful in learning quite a few syntactic structures in Chinese that are nicely related to the 3 classes of verbs, as will be illustrated with negation in Chinese in the section below. The table below presents some of the most important properties of these 3 classes of verbs, as reflected through syntactic behaviour.  modification x | v x Le- completive v 4 v Zai- progressive v x x Reduplication Y (tentative) Y (intensification) x Bu- negation v v x  negation v x v XIVHere are more examples of 3 classes of verbs. Action Verbs: mai ‘buy’, zud ‘sit’, xué ‘learn; imitate’, kan ‘look’ State Verbs: xihuan ‘like’, zhidao ‘know’, néng ‘can’, gui ‘expensive’ Process Verbs: wangle ‘forget’, chén ‘sink’, biye ‘graduate’, xing ‘wake up’ G. Negation. Negation in Chinese is by means of placing a negative adverb immediately in front of a verb. (Remember that adjectives in Chinese are a type of State verbs!) When an action verb is negated with ‘bu’, the meaning can be either ‘intend not to, refuse to’ or ‘not in a habit of’, e.g. Ni bu mai pido; w6 jit bi rang ni jinqu! (If you don’t buy a ticket, | won’t let you in!) Ta zuotian zhé tian bu jié dianhua. (He did not want to answer the phone all day yesterday.)  laoshi bt hé jit. (Mr. Teng does not drink.) ‘Bw’ has the meaning above but is independent of temporal reference. The first sentence above refers to the present moment or a minute later after the utterance, and the second to the past. A habit again is panchronic. But when an action verb is negated with ‘méi(y6u)’, its time reference must be in the past, meaning ‘something did not come to pass’, e.g. Ta méi lai shangban. (He did not come to work.) Ta méi dai qian lai. (He did not bring any money.) A state verb can only be negated with ‘bu’, referring to the non-existence of that state, whether in the past, at present, or in the future, e.g. Ta bu zhidao zhejian shi. (He did not/does not know this.) Ta bu xiang gén ni qu. (He did not/does not want to go with you.)  zuijin bt  (New York was/is/will not be hot.) A process verb can only be negated with ‘méi’, referring to the non-happening of a change from one state to another, usually in the past, e.g. Yift méi po; ni jit réng le? (You threw away perfectly good clothes?) Nido hai méi si; ni jit fang le ba! (The bird is still alive. Why don’t you let it free?) Ta méi biye yiqian, hai dé dagong. (He has to work odd jobs before graduating.) As can be gathered from the above, negation of verbs in Chinese follows neat patterns, but this is so only after we work with the new system of verb classifications as presented in this series. Here’s one more interesting fact about negation in Chinese before closing this section. When some action verbs refer to some activities that result in something stable, e.g. when you put on clothes, you want the clothes to stay on you, the negation of those verbs can be usually translated in the present tense in English, e.g. Ta zé méi chuan yifu? (How come he is naked?) W6 jintian méi dai qian. (I have no money with me today.) XVH. A new system of Parts of Speech in Chinese. In the system of parts of speech adopted in this series, there are at the highest level a total of 8 parts of speech, as given below. This system includes the following major properties. First and foremost, it is errors-driven and can address some of the most prevailing errors exhibited by learners of Chinese. This characteristic dictates the depth of sub-categories in a system of grammatical categories. Secondly, it employs the concept of ‘default’. This property greatly simplifies the over-all framework of the new system, so that it reduces the number of categories used, simplifies the labeling of categories, and takes advantage of the learners’ contribution in terms of positive transfer. And lastly, it incorporates both semantic as well as syntactic concepts, so that it bypasses the traditionally problematic category of adjectives by establishing three major semantic types of verbs, viz. action, state and process. Adv Adverb (dou ‘all’, dagai ‘probably’) Conj Conjunction (gén ‘and’, ké ‘but’) Det Determiner (zhé ‘this’, na ‘that’) M Measure (ge, tido; xia, ci) N Noun (w6 ‘I’, yOngqi ‘courage’) Ptc Particle (ma ‘question particle’, le ‘completive verbal particle’) Prep Preposition (cong ‘from’, duiyu ‘regarding’) Vv Action Verb, transitive (mai ‘buy’, chi ‘eat’) Vi Action Verb, intransitive (ki ‘cry’, zud ‘sit’) Vaux Auxiliary Verb (néng ‘can’, xiang ‘would like to’) V-sep Separable Verb (jiéhiin ‘get married’, shéng ‘get angry’) Vs State Verb, intransitive (hao ‘good’, gui ‘expensive’) Vst State Verb, transitive (xihuan ‘like’, zhidao ‘know’) Vs-attr State Verb, attributive (zhtiyao ‘primary’, xi ‘mini-’) Vs-pred State Verb, predicative (gou ‘enough’, dud ‘plenty’) Vp Process Verb, intransitive (si ‘die’, wan ‘finish’) Vpt Process Verb, transitive (po (dong) ‘lit. break (hole) , li (féng) ‘lit. crack (a crack)) Notes: Default values: When no marking appears under a category, a default reading takes place, which has been built into the system by observing the commonest patterns of the highest frequency. A default value can be loosely understood as the most likely candidate. A default system results in using fewer symbols, which makes it easy on the eyes, reducing the amount of processing. Our default readings are as follows. Default transitivity. When a verb is not marked, i.e. V, it’s an action verb. An unmarked action verb, furthermore, is transitive. A state verb is marked as Vs, but if it’s not further marked, it’s intransitive. The same holds for process verbs, i.e. Vp is by default intransitive. Default position of adjectives. Typical adjectives occur as predicates, e.g. ‘This is great!’ Therefore, unmarked Vs are predicative, and adjectives that cannot be predicates will be marked for this feature, e.g. zhiiyao ‘primary’ is an adjective but it cannot be a predicate, i.e. *Zhétiao lu hén zhityao. ‘*This road is very primary.’ Therefore it is marked Vs-attr, meaning it can only be used attributively, i.e. zhiyao daolu ‘primary road’. On the other hand, ‘gou’ ‘enough’ in Chinese can only be used predicatively, not attributively, e.g. “Shijian gou’ ‘*?Time is XVIenough.’, but not *gou shijidn “enough time’. Therefore gou is marked Vs-pred. Employing this new system of parts of speech guarantees good grammar! Default wordhood. In English, words cannot be torn apart and be used separately, e.g. *mis- not —understand. Likewise in Chinese, e.g. *xibuhuan ‘do not like’. However, there is a large group of words in Chinese that are exceptions to this probably universal rule and can be separated. They are called ‘separable words’, marked -sep in our new system of parts of speech. For example, shéng ‘angry’ is a word, but it is fine to say shéng ta qi ‘angry at him’.  ‘get married’ is a word but it’s fine to say jié ‘been married before’ or jié san ci hiin “been married 3 times before’. There are at least a couple of hundred separable words in modern Chinese. Even native speakers have to learn that certain words can be separated. Thus, memorizing them is the only way to deal with them by learners, and our new system of parts of speech helps them along nicely. Go over the vocabulary lists in this series and look for the marking —sep. Now, what motivates this severing of words? Ask Chinese gods, not your teachers! We only know a little about the syntactic circumstances under which they get separated. First and foremost, separable words are in most cases intransitive verbs, whether action, state or process. When these verbs are further associated with targets (nouns, conceptual objects), frequency (number of times), duration (for how long), occurrence (done, done away with) etc., separation takes pace and these associated elements are inserted in between. More examples are given below. W6 jinnian yijing kdoguo 20 ci shi le!! (I’ve taken 20 exams to date this year!) W6 dadogud qian le; ta hai shéng (1 apologized, but he’s still mad!) Fang san tian jia; dajia dou zou le. (There will be a break of 3 days, and everyone has left.) Final Words This is a very brief introduction to the modern Mandarin Chinese language, which is the standard world-wide. This introduction can only highlight the most salient properties of the language. Many other features of the language have been left out by design. For instance, nothing has been said about the patterns of word-formations in Chinese, and no presentation has been made of the unique written script of the language. Readers are advised to search on-line for resources relating to particular aspects of the language. For reading, please consult a highly readable best-seller in this regard, viz. Li, Charles and Sandra Thompson. 1982. Mandarin Chinese: a reference grammar. UC Los Angeles Press. (Authorised reprinting by Crane publishing Company, Taipei, Taiwan, still available as of October 2009). XVIIHighlights of Lessons eee eee eee eee eee eee ee eee eee eee eee eee ee eee eee eee eee ee ee es Learning Objectives 0 Introducing [1. Welcome to Myself 2 Taiwan! 4. Learning simple greetings. . Learning simple phrases to introduce people. 3. Learning simple phrases to discuss likes/ dislikes. Learning simple phrases to express gratitude. Grammar . Ways to Ask Questions in Chinese A. Asking Questions with A-not-A B. Asking Questions with %% ma Answering Questions in Chinese A. Affirmative Answers B. Negative Replies with # bu Modification Marker 4& hén Contrastive Questions with % ne 8 Family Members | 1. Learning to talk about people in my family 1. 4 de possessive My Family eee and their names. 2. Modifier Marker &) de 2. Learning to describe people, places, and 3. # yu possessive ossessions. 3 1 . , talk about the number of people |" #* 2 totality »aming fo Talc about the number OF PSOP’e 5 Measures (él ge and 4x zhang ina family. 8 Hobbies 1. Learning to describe likes/dislikes (e.g., 1. Placement of Time Words What Are You sports and movies). 2.To Go Do Something with # qu Doing Over the 2. Learning to express what two groups have in 3, Topic Sentences eee or | 4. The Word Order of Adverbs 4 yé 48 dou 3. Leaming to politely ask others their opinions and and ¥ chang re ane c See . 5. Making Suggestions °& ba 4. Learning to form choice questions. 6 Shopping 1. Learning to ask and talk about prices. 1. Measures 4% kuai, #  & zhi and 4@ Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? | Food and Drink ° Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious 8 Locations and Their School Positions Is Up in the Mountains XVII 3. Learning to use simple phrases to describe . Learning the names of common foods and | | . Learning to express likes for and make 2. Learning to ask for reasons. the size and function of common objects. zhong .Preposition bang on behalf of . 8) De-phrase with the Head Noun Omitted A tai-+- T le overly - 8% néng capability % dud ...and more describing their taste. simple comments about food. . Leaming to describe what somebody can/can’t do and how well one does it. Learning to ask for help. . Learning to describe locations (e.g., near or 1. far). 2) other places. yt Learning to make simple comments about 5 the appearance of a place. A —% you yidian slightly . Complement Marker # de . Acquired Skills @ hui Destination Marker 2] dao Locative Marker # zai . Existential Sentence with 4 ydu - Learning to talk about place in the vicinity of 3, Softened Action V (—) V J x bushi Negation Location of an Activityee eee eee eee ee ERE EEE HEHEHE ERO EEE HEHEHE HEHEHE EH EEE HEH EES PieK eee Notes on Pinyin and Pronunciation | Introduction to Chinese Characters 1. Tea Culture 1. The Tones Basic Chinese Strokes 2. Chinese Nicknames 2. Third Tone Change 3. Bu( 4% ) Tone Changes Family Central to Chinese Culture 1. Pinyin Rules (1) 1. Basic Structure o f Chinese Characters 2. Tone Changes for — YT 2. Basic Template for Chinese Calligraphy A One-of-a-kind Leisure Activity — Pinyin Rules (2) Using Components to Learn Chinese Shrimp Fishing Characters Around-the-clock Convenience Stores 1. Pinyin Rules GB) - - Basic Chinese Radicals 2. Tone Mark Rules (Position of the Tone Marks) 1. Queuing up at Food Stands Pinyin Rules (4) The Earliest Chinese Characters. 2. Street Vendors in Taiwan 1. Taboos with the Number v9 si and Lucky The Six Categories of Chinese Characters Numbers 7% lit. and ~ ba 2. Birth Rate vs. Private Schools XIXTopic & Sey Themes Learning Objectives Grammar @ Time 1, Learning to tell and ask about time. 1. Time and Place of Events Going to KTV (Time-When and 2. Learning to describe an activity that takes 2. #& cong i] dao--- from A toB at9 O'clock in Time-Duration) place at a point in time (time-when) or 3. Progressive, On-going Actions 7£ zai the Morning during a certain frame (time-duration). e . i. ; 4. # méi each and every 3. Learning to make appointments with 5, TE ké . friends. . LL ké permission 4. Learning to talk about habitual activities. 6 Transportation 1. Learning the names of different types of 1. Companionship with 3% gén Taking a Train transportation and talking about getting to 2. Asking How with & #& zé to Tainan cessor, 3. Implicit Comparison with bb # bijido 2. Learning to talk about some one’s plans for 4, Xyour--S.you--: both A and B their free time. pA you . you oterAran 3. Learning to make simple comparisons about pecomoauscnw LoL abl various modes of transportation. 4. Learning to explain likes and dislikes. 8 Leisure 1. Learning to use time expressions to describe 1. Time-When vs. Time-Duration Where Will events: 2. Time-Duration ‘for a period of time’ You Go for the 2. Learning to discuss travel plans with 3. +++ 84 de shihou when i 2 friends. Holidays? mens 4. # BEAR you shihou--- 4 84% you shihou-- 3. Learning to talk about hypothetical sometimes... sometimes... situations. = . 2 . 5. Condition and Consequence with # % yaoshi--- 4. Learning to give suggestions about leisure 8 jiu activities. © The Appearance 1. Learning to give simple descriptions of 1.VV & kan to try and see The Fruit in Taiwan Tastes Really Good I Would Like to Rent a Place ® How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? XX of People and Things Renting a Place Study, Work someone’s appearance. 2. Learning to describe the color, smell, and taste of food. w . Learning to briefly explain and give reasons. 4. Learning to describe tentative activities and changeable states. 2. Intensification with Reduplicated State Verbs 3. Clause as Modifiers of Nouns 4. Change in Situation with Sentential 7 le 5. Cause and Effect with A) A yin > ATLA sudyi* 1. Learning to talk about renting a place to live. 2. Learning to talk about environment of a room or a house. 3. Learning to make requests, e.g., to one’s landlord. 1. Learning to discuss study plans and future plans. 2. Learning to talk about sequences of events. 3. Learning to describe past actions and experience. 1. To Come to Do Something with # lai 2. Sooner Than Expected with # jid 3. Existential Subject with 4 you 4. Different Types of # hui 5. Omitting Nouns at 2nd Mention 1. # xian---# zai-- first..., and then ... 2.To Focus with % shi---49 de 3. YAR yihou after... 4. Special Meanings of 47 hao / # nan + VerbsBits of Chinese Culture CRBS NEC Os Or em mien momen merettacowy KTV —A Popular Leisure Activity in Taiwan — Pinyin Rules (5) Chinese Punctuation Marks 1. Souvenirs Pinyin Rules (6) 2. YouBike in Taipei Subtitled Television Programs The Meanings of Different Colors Renting a Place in Taiwan 1. Addressing People in the Workplace 2. Privacy Means Something Different for | Taiwanese XX!brit) rv eelycaek yoy ® Social Life 1. Learning to make appointments on the 1. — yrs BE jile+- ...as soon as... Happy Birthday phone. 2. Completed Action with Verbal 7 le 2. ae to ask friends about their dietary 3. 7 Negation vs. #% Negation i. = 4. All-inclusive with Question Words Pipers lolcomPare) cultures: 5. More /ess...Than Planned with $ dud / + 4. ne express wishes to a shdo + Verb::- on special occasions and to respon | oe; > appropriately when others offier you wishes 6. RFR snibas ete: .. on special occasions. 7. Comparison with sR gén — #& yfyang ®@ The Weather 1. Learning to talk about weather conditions, 1. Time-Duration after Verbal 7 le It’s So Cold! including typhoons. 2. Completion-to-date with Double T le 2. Learning to talk about the four seasonsand 3, tk kuai--- 7 le about to explain why you like or dislike them. . . A flemat 4. Comparison & gén even more so beeen aan ance ee 5. Inferior Comparison #4 +++ méi 4. Learning to make simple statements about experiences, e.g., trips. © Falling Sick 1. Learning to ask someone how they are I Don’t Feel Well feeling. 2. Learning to describe symptoms in simple terms. 3. Learning to give suggestions to somebody who is sick. 4. Learning to reject or accept suggestions. 2. To Dispose of Something with 72, ba 3.V J le--# jit: do...right after doing... 4. — 88 yidian a bit 5. Comparing Actions with a ## de Complement | 1. Non-committal Stance with Question Words 6. Complements of Degree in Comparison Structures 7. Separable Verbs XXIilBits of Chinese Culture ISCMi BUM aura taCey 1. Congratulatory Expressions in Chinese 2. Taiwanese Birthdays Typhoon Days-Off Presi CRG ite Gini tucacy Wearing Surgical Masks XXillList of Parts of Speech in Chinese N Vv Adv Conj Prep Ptc Det ‘noun ae | verb HA | adverb «BI 34) ‘ conjunction «3825 preposition aA measure #4 particle BAe determiner PRR Verb Classification Vi V-sep Vs Vst Vs-attr Vs-pred Vs-sep Vaux Vp Vpt Vp-sep transitive action verbs intransitive action verbs intransitive action verbs, separable intransitive state verbs “transitive state verbs intransitive state verbs, attributive only intransitive state verbs, predicative only intransitive state verbs, separable auxiliary verbs intransitive process verbs ' transitive process verbs intransitive process verbs, separable Default Vaiues of the Symbois Vs Vp V-sep XXIV | action, transitive : state, intransitive | process, intransitive : separable, intransitive ks EER BARS Hs Gs BRS BH eR > Korh sae IR RS Rs aR mB .a. ae 5 ARs oF + Ap. # s d = eS oe BDA HA BAG MN HA BAG) Ve BES 2A A Bh ik He BADE HA RR BAIR HA BK RANK HA BAD AR AG te S34 By iy A BA wee HHA Beth Ae tH) A Bin elcid 24 BR. a Ry Ha eR. AA Ras & RH BR Wh > > ae SAS OR RS Op Bh Rh oe ee "SH > ba. eB RR Hes. BR. AS Sf. 2H HE ror Bors s Wek» AR @. me. TU Be RO + HRS Bi. BR KHClassroom Phrases @ L#7: —» © *H-  le. «—» Bu dui. Wrong. Incorrect. Let’s begin the class. — = «e—» 22 AALSF 0 @ whe: O Aone «—» Qing nian duihua. Qing dakai sho. Read the dialogue, please. Open your book. —- 2 £ Ae = @ RA x AR ° O BHAPRLAB? «—» Qing kan hé Qing kan di wt ye. e— Look at the board, please. Please see page 5. ens © ert? O RA MRPAB «—» Dong bu ding? 9 W6 shu, nimen ting. «— 2? Do you understand? I ’ll speak, you listen. e—)» ® ra T 2 325 = Dong le! ze 29 ig o 8 RR % e—» Yes, I/we understand. Qing gén w6 shud. eas Please repeat after me. ® A ee A Fy 3B 2 —» : You méi you wenti? > 25 . oe an Ea [2 BoRe = Any question? Qing zai shud/nian yi ci. «e—» , Please say it again. c—» © BSF ! ena  hao! 24 KR : Very good! OQ 2A ES ° es Qing huida. ela ® - 2 5 Please answer my question. Xiake e—» . The class is over. o : aA le] > RMF ABS/ HB? = «---» 7  zhé ge zi zé nian/xié? How do you pronounce/spell this word? €=~® OQ #7 “I. Dui le! aw Right! Correct! XXVv Li Minghua awk aon on Introduction to Characters Li Ming-hua is from Taipei, Taiwan. Male. Age 32. Single. He works in a bank. He has worked in Vietnam for 6 months and is an acquaintance of Yue-mei Chen’s father, who entrusted the responsibility of taking care of his daughter to Ming-hua. They met at the airport. Bai Ru-yu is from New York, USA. Female. Age 21. She is a student. Yue-mei and An- tong are her classmates. RAK   > Her college is situated in a Bai Ruy   RISE Zhang Yi-jun is a Taiwanese w Pak college student. 0) Female. Age 20. rf i YL yA Zhang Yijan XXVI mountain in Hualien. She met An- tong on a trip. She is a language exchange partner of An-tong. bs Tidnzhong  Chen Yue-mei is from Hanoi, Vietnam. Female. Age 22. She traveled to Taiwan with her father’s friend,Wang Kai-wen. They were picked up at the airport by Ming-hua, her father’s Taiwanese acquaintance. She is a student. Ru-yu and An-tong are her classmates. Ma An-tong is from Tegucigalpa, Republic of Honduras. Male. Age 22. He is a student. Yue-mei and Ru-yu are his classmates. He is Yi-jun’s language exchange partner and Yi-jun is his best friend in Taiwan. Tianzhong Chengyi is from Tokyo, Japan. Male. Age 30. Single. He works in Taiwan as an expatriate of a Japanese motor company. Besides working, he is also learning Chinese in a language center. He is in the same class with Yue-mei, Ru-yu, and An-tong and he happens to be Li Ming-hua’s client. Tianzhong’s girlfriend is coming to Taiwan and he wants to show her around.YES PAWR LEE EP 2 Hae RE Welcome to Taiwan! & @ @ 7® Learning Objectives Topic: 4 #%7)+ Introducing Myself + Learning simple greetings. + Learning simple phrases to introduce people. + Learning simple phrases to discuss likes/dislikes. + Learning simple phrases to express gratitude.KPRR EE ! Welcome to Taiwan! #7— Dialogue I \ 01-1 ah: HR OR RRA KA bah? Minghua :  ni shi   xi ma? i i A Fee) o Bat UR R BE BUT  : Shide.  ni 14i jig women. aA RBR ° Re FW Minghua — ;   shi Li Minghua. A 232 xt EAE?  :  shi Wang  Bl UR Fo FREE? Be  : Ni hao. W6 xing Wang, jiao  aA WRAP AE ° HO RAPT RR BIE Minghua : Nimen hao. Huadnying nimen lai Taiwan. He RK —SSS == SSeS SSS!oe Ae esas Ss a Welcome to Taiwan! ee ere icy Minghua_ : Excuse me, are you Miss Chen Yuemei? Yuemei —_: ‘Yes. Thank you for coming to pick us up. Minghua_ : You’re welcome. My name is Minghua Li. Yuemei —_: This is Mr. Wang. Kaiwen : Hi, my surname is Wang. My first name is Kaiwen. Minghua_ : How are you? Welcome to Taiwan. CER | \ 01-2 People in the dialogue 1 RAS   ENG a woman from Vietnam 2 ZB ay Li Minghua oe a man from Taiwan 3 ERA Wang  ae a man from the US Vocabulary 4 Up ni x, (N) you 5 BR lai 2, (Vv) to come 6 x shi P* (Vst) to be 7 7s #8 Xidopid ne (N) Miss, Ms. 8 ae ma iy (Ptc) sentence final particle 9 Fz jie : (V) to pick sb up 10 APY women ae (N) we, us 11 #& wd x (N) Ime 12 zhé / zhé EWES (Det) this 13 & xi : A (N) Mr. 14 aE hao Ue (Vs) fine, well 15 E xing x (Vst) to be surnamed 16 | fae a (Vst) Wo Be called Hes to have the (N) you (plural) < va: 17) UPA nimen Lo—. Ap xe Names Bs 18 “ a uae ) Taiwan a 4 Taiwan =o Phrases 19 BR ie huanying Kar welcome May I ask you... = y. Q ee y y 20 25 FE] gingwen we Excuse me.... 21 x shide cae yes 22 at eat xiexie ii Thank you. 23 I BR bikeqi VERS You’re welcome. How are you? yr i ha oe 24 NR AF ni hao coe =I ¥) 3% — Dialogue II \ 01-3LESSON © 7 © Hie sE REM ! A CeCe CM EEL aA = > HBR: Minghua : Qing hé cha. BA So: Hat RAH HR RHR? oe  :  Hn   zhé shi shén cha? aA #: RAMA BBA BK GR Minghua :  shi Wiil6ng cha. Taiwan rén xihuan hé cha. BUA ARAB?  nimen  rén ne? A F&F ith RR AKA?  s Ta bu shi  rén aA = HAR OR EIR BA? Minghua : Duibudi, ni shi nd gud rén el Li he ABA?  : W6 shi  rén aA =: HS te BAR BG ory ? Minghua :  ni yao bt yao hé kafei? BA So Bet! RAH Mosk > R BRH He  :  W6 bu hé  wo xihudn hé cha. et ee osteo Minghua_: Please have some tea. Kaiwen : Thank you. This tastes good. May I ask what kind of tea this is? Minghua_: This is Oolong tea. Taiwanese like to drink tea. Kaiwen, how about you Japanese people? Yuemei —_: He is not Japanese. Minghua_: Iam sorry. Which country are you from? Kaiwen : Tam American. Minghua : Kaiwen, would you like to drink coffee? Kaiwen : Thank you. I don’t drink coffee. I like to drink tea.——————- SRP RRB Vocabulary 1 a qing s (Vv) please 2 ok he y (V) to drink 3 oS cha 4, (N) tea 4 4 hén Nee (Adv) very 5 4 8  a (Vs) vos food to drink) to taste 6 A Jt shén ae (N) what 7 XR rén eZ (N) person, people 8 BR xihuan XN 4 (Vst) to like 9 YE, ne e (Ptc) sentence final particle 10 Ab, ta | (N) he, him 11 7S bu RA (Adv) not 12 "AR na /  3/20 (Det) which 13 B yao we (Vaux) — to want to 14 ofa a4  ra (N) coffee Names 15 FEZ = Wiilong cha ag Oolong tea 16 BA  sy Japan 17 &  Ve America Phrases 18 HAAG duibiqi Ras I'm sorry. 19 oa na gud /  gud 2 &/ 2 § Which country?LESSON ¢ 7 « fi te RSH ! Tr Bez I. Ways to Ask Questions in Chinese A. Asking Questions with A-not-A Function: The A-not-A form of making a question is the most neutral way to ask a question in Chinese and closest to yes/no questions in English. ERAERAR RG Moye ? Wang  yao bu yao hé  0 Does Mr. Wang want to have some coffee? RAR HR ? Zhe shi bu shi  cha? Is this Oolong tea? Beh KE Bik bb O BEABRAFERKGR ? Taiwan rén xihuan bu xihuan hé cha? Do Taiwanese people like to drink tea? Structures: The “A” in the structure refers to the first verbal element. 40° ehoedE ° $e 9% FRR oho °? Ta he kafei. Ta hé bu hé kafei? oe He’ll have coffee. Does he want to drink coffee? O KAKA? URRERARA? Ni shi  rén Ni shi bu shi  rén You are Japanese. Are you Japanese? O tRER- RA REM ? Ta lai Taiwan. Ta lai bu lai Taiwan? He came to Taiwan. Is he coming to Taiwan?———* AP RRZ1 Usage: When the verbal element in an A-not-A question is disyllabic (XY), the second syllable (Y) can be dropped in the first “A” of the pattern, so “X Y-not-XY” is the same as “X-not-XY”. For example, #. & # # & # #& ? Ni xihuan bu xihuan w6? is the same as 4, BAR BRA ? Ni xi bu xihudn w6? (Do you like me?) 4 4 Exercise Complete questions using A-not-A form. @ Fe FF BW RAB A © @ RAZR RA KAREN ° EAL EAA ERG oye o Ae, AR BH HK 4 te A B® © te RRR IL? hh, BR -ZIk (Taibéi, Taipei) B. Asking Questions with °§ ma Function: Questions can be formed using the question particle *§ ma. It is usually used for short questions. @ ws? O RRERINS ? Ni hao ma? Ni 1ai jié women ma? How are you? Are you here to pick us up? O tkAKAS? Ta shi  rén ma? Is he Japanese?LESSON ¢ 7 ¢ #i@tp RS |! Welcome to Taiwan! Structures: SENTENCE + "% ma? The sentence in "% ma questions can be either in the affirmative or negative. Negation: OD HAIRS ? O RFREBAB? Ta bu xing  ma? Ni bd shi Taiwan rén ma? Isn’t he surnamed Chen? Aren’t you Taiwanese? O LAB moses ? Ta bu hé kafei ma? Doesn’t he drink coffee? Usage: The A-not-A question form indicates no assumption, and is used for neutral inquiries or longer inquiries. It does not take a "% ma question particle at the end of the sentence. One cannot say *i8 A 4% ?  shi bu shi cha ma? (‘Is this tea?’). 3% ma questions, by contrast, are used for short inquiries. But in most cases, these two forms of question are often interchangeable. OQ *%4t&? O KZ8RS? Ni hao ma? Ni yao hé cha ma? How are you? Do you want to drink tea? O RPZARB SRA ? Nimen yao bu yao hé  cha? Do you want to drink Oolong tea? 4 4} Exercise 2S cheuoss sig: Pe ma ileasealo) on oe SPOUSE tothe og Question Recponee 0 a a @ RR EPA ORE RG ory ©————* KP XR 1 2? EAA RAK 2? WARK ARA 0 0 II. Answering Questions in Chinese A. Affirmative Answers Affirmative answers can be formed by repeating the main verb in the question, followed by a sentence in the affirmative, e.g., . B, 3K SB, rHeh O A: HRAREBA? /HREBAB? Ta shi bu shi Taiwan rén / Ta shi Taiwan rén ma? Is he Taiwanese? Bik 2 EMA: Shi, ta shi Taiwan rén Yes, he is Taiwanese. O AS KERERKER? /MERKERS ? Ni xi bu xihuan Taiwan? / Ni xihuan Taiwan ma? Do you like Taiwan? . + ab y a a4 s RA B: BR? REREE e Xihuan, w6 xihuan Taiwan. Yes, I like Taiwan. O A: EXERARARA? / EXERAKAG? Wang  shi bu shi  rén / Wang  shi  rén ma? Is Mr. Wang Japanese ? Bi: & > EAERARA®? Shi, Wang  shi  rén Yes, Mr. Wang is Japanese. O A: hBRG HRA? / oh BRKG ? Ta hé bu hé Wilong cha? / Ta hé Willong cha ma? Does he drink O slong tea? 10ACCOR EEL Bi: > 1h REA °  ta hé Wulong cha. Yes, he drinks Oolong tea. LESSON ¢ J ¢ Ri‘ RSS! In Chinese, short answers in the affirmative can be made by simply repeating the verb from the question. @O KREKES? Ni shi Wang  ma? Are you Mr. Wang? AEA AR REI ? Ta lai bu lai Taiwan? °e Will he come to Taiwan? We BAKA BIK|R ? Ta xihuan bu xihuan hé cha? Does he like tea? -& Y. Exercise Give affirmative Tesponses. Question 2 + a zy + SISABRAERBR ? MR RAR BG Horse ? UR BH ? eee: RB] BRAG oe eee Response 11———- ERP XRE1 12 B. Negative Replies with * bu Negative replies can be formed by repeating the main verb in its negative form, 1.e., A bu + verb, followed by a sentence in the negative. # bi is an adverb which is placed before a verb or another adverb, e.g., QO HrAFRERE? Re? HRREAL © Ta shi bu shi Li  Bu shi, ta bu shi Li  Is he Mr. Li? No, he is not Mr. Li. O@ EXAABRAS FR > He AR BH ° Wang  hé cha ma? Bu, ta bt hé Does Mr. Wang drink tea? No, he doesn’t drink tea. © FhMAAFREMA? FR EDEL EMA- Li  shi bu shi Taiwan rén Bu shi, Li  bu shi Taiwan rén Is Miss Li Taiwanese? No, Miss Li is not Taiwanese. In Chinese, the answer to a question can consist of just the verb in the question asked. QO HRFR|AwWw4 ? IR ° Ta yao bu yao hé kafei? Bu yao. Does he want to drink coffee? No. ay ak a ay O KERKAEKGE SRA ? FBR ° Ni xihuan bu xihuan hé Wilong cha? Bu xihuan. Do you like to drink Oolong tea? No. O R)hweRRABA? Fe °   shi bu shi  rén Bu shi. Is Miss Chen American? No. Usage: There are some exceptions to the rules above. For example, when the verb is +4 xing “to be surnamed” or 4 jido “to be called”. When the question is #u#t #°% ? Ta xing Li ma? ‘Is he surnamed Li?’, the negative reply should be ##t = Bu xing Li ‘(He is) not surnamed Li.’, rather than *7# 4 ii xing. When the question is # %& 4 ™4 Fi 3c% ? Li  jido  ma? ‘Is Mr. Li called Kaiwen?’, the negativeLESSON ¢ 7 « Rite REM ! reply should be # ™ BA 3& Bu jido  ‘(He is) not called Kaiwen.’, rather than *RY bu jiao. | 8 Exercise Please answer the questions based on the pictures given below. 0 F)BMWEAR O HERALEB? O HERBS? A ? =. III. Modification Marker 4% hén Function: The adverb 72 hén modifies state verbs (Vs). O RRA » O HREKER W6 hén hao. Ta hén xihuan Taiwan. I am fine. He likes Taiwan. B 3 4 + aL al O SEAREKSE BIER » Taiwan rén hén xihuan hé Wilong cha. Taiwanese people like to drink Oolong tea. 13© SRP REL Structures: The adverb 4R hén is placed before state verbs (Vs) as follows: Subject 4& hén + State Verb. + QO KReARAS Wiilong cha hén  Oolong tea tastes good. @O RPK ° Women hén hao. We are fine. O MRERARA> Ta hén xihuan  rén He likes Japanese people. Usage: In general, adjectival state verbs must be preceded by either # or intensifiers. When no particular intensity is intended, they are preceded by 4K hén That is, #R hén + stative verb means ‘very stative verb’ (very expensive, very good, very tall, etc.) and sometimes it just means a stative verb. When /f is intended to actually mean ‘very’, it is typically stressed in speech. & B Exercise (1-2 not stressed, 3-5 stressed ) QO his? 0 O R)aA te % AH 2 0 8 IV. Contrastive Questions with ’ ne FURAF © # aA ER BBR h Rs HAIR & BRYA Yes, she does. HIRE ETE ° Yes, he does. HORE © Yes, he (actually) does. Function: The % ve question is a tag question with a short form following a statement. 14MC CO @O KRESBK> ve? W6 yao hé cha, ni ne? I want to drink tea, and you? EAERARA? BREA %E ? Wang  shi  rén Li 8  ne? Mr. Wang is Japanese. What about Mr. Li? Structures: 1. Same predicate, different subjects S1 V O, S2 % ne? (1) RAB A > HIE ? (2) Ta shi  rén ni ne? He’s American. And you? 2. Same subject, different predicates SV 01, 02 % ne? (1) ARBAB A > yok ve ? (2) Ni xihuan hé cha,  ne? You like to drink tea. How about coffee? 4 ® Exercise LESSON © 7 + Hee RSH ! Ae AR PR OIE > BR] Hoe ? Ta bu hé    ne? He does not drink coffee. What about Miss Chen? He BRP? WR VE ? Ta xihuan women, ni ne? He likes us. How about you? fe RG owode > HE, 2 Ta bu hé  cha ne? He doesn’t drink coffee. How about tea? Pueseaess Qo Bb RBS > ERLE? @ AAABRKS wt > © HREB FALE? O RAB w4k > 1-3 same predicate, different subjects. 4-5 same subject, different % ? O HB AER ” 15oe a RE I. Introducing Yourself and Others Goal: Learning to give and obtain basic personal MAE > BILE > HRS? + | RY AAAD RRAKA® information. Task: Pair up with a classmate, say hello, and introduce yourself. Then ask him/her for his/ her name, where s/he is from, and introduce him/her to the class. II. Likes and Dislikes Goal: Learning to ask whether someone likes to drink tea or coffee. Task: Use the A-not-A form #2 #7 HZ #& to ask a classmate whether s/he likes to drink tea/coffee. If the answer is in the affirmative, then treat him/her to one. If the answer is in the negative, give other options. III. Expressing Thanks Goal: Learning to respond to inquiries and express thanks. Task: Pair up for a conversation. Ask questions like: 16LESSON ¢ 7 ¢ Ri REM ! MoT RO EE | A: (BARB? Ni yao bu yao...? Would you like...? B: sa) / RB > Brat o Haode / Bu yao, xiexie. Yes / No, thank you. IV. Obtaining Information Goal: Learning to use ¥% ne questions to obtain more information. Task: Make sentences based on the pictures below. Then use a “ ¥ question” to ask your classmate for information. E.g., A: BRA ER EMRE? Bi RBBB 17———- $A PRB 1 18 PQ Re ea ty Tea Culture “Come over for some tea!” is a common phrase used much like the phrase in English, “You really have to drop by my place sometime for a cup of coffee”. In Taiwan, friends gather around a table with a tea set on it in their free time and drink tea. They drink the tea from delicate, little teacups and might discuss _ its fragrance and taste. Chatting over tea is a favorite way of the Chinese to bond and keep abreast of the latest things in their lives. Chinese tea making BRAARAM RH At home, many people make themselves a cup of (QR) BOR / SE EE hot tea or prepare a pot for the family for after-dinner conversation. Many people like to start off the day at the office with a cup of tea. Those with a more discerning palate might make tea using tea leaves, while teabags probably suffices for others. In the end, they all enjoy a nice cup of hot tea. In the shade of old trees in parks or near temples, you can find folks sitting around small tables drinking tea and snacking on melon seeds. Tea is an everyday part of life of the people of Taiwan. & Tea sets Atea house in Taiwan (AIEIRE) ABR / BF» (BIBRA) RR / Ble» HALESSON ¢ 7 ¢ KitrRE® ! ACen CU EO Chinese Nicknames It is customary for Chinese to call friends and loved ones by nicknames. The character “25” Ido is sometimes added before the last name or “/]s” xido placed in front of the second character of the given name to form nicknames. Due to the influence of the Taiwanese dialect, nicknames in Taiwan are often formed by placing the character “|” @ in front of the name or the second character of the given name is repeated. For example, someone by the name of “IR 3% #” could be nicknamed “4 BR “Oh BR Po EP EE” or “HP Notes on Pinyin and Pronunciation 1. TheTones 3 # #34 First tone —#C— ) Hjie> BH he» th ta Secondtone =#( 7) #ldirv X cha»  Third tone Ze CV) Ve ni >» #& wd > 3% ging » 7K hén > MB na Fourth tone we (CN ) shiv iS zhé » 4 xing » | jido + B yao Neutraltone #4 *% ma > %é ne // HF] women > R41} nimen » (no tone mark) 7% 4) shide » 243 xié + ++ shén 19———e RP XLRB1 2. Third Tone Change = # #% 3 (1) When two characters with third tones are found together, the first third tone is pronounced with a second tone as in these two examples in this lesson: dh xi (V+Vo7V) 4 nih’o (V+v— 7 v ) Despite the change in pronunciation, however, it is still marked as a third tone in pinyin. (2) Rules for third-tone changes = # # 24% al) : VV Vv VV Vv Vv (7) (7) (7) vj. 4B Hi 4k AF 4R BF 8 vv Vv Vv Vv Vv -- (4) (4) (4 WR AF s vy 4B HR BK vv Vv Vv (7) (7) 4k OXF MR 3F 3. Bu(#*)ToneChanges ' A , 4) #37 The tone for 7 bi changes depending on the tone of the character that follows it. When A bu is followed by a character with a first, second, or third tone, 7 by is pronounced and the pinyin marked with a fourth tone ( \ ) . When % bi is followed by a character with a fourth tone, it is pronounced and the pinyin marked with a second tone (7 ) . 20LESSON ¢ 7 ¢ KigteRE ! CeO Om PE 7% bi + character with 1°, 2" or 3" tone > % pronounced with 4" tone (4" tone mark) A bi + character with 4" tone > % pronounced with 2™ tone (2 tone mark) \ — 7 \ Ko oh HE A FR 7 \ a, A (KR) A 4A y . ~ |v (2)k B A BR (#4) #A Ae Introduction to Chinese Characters Basic Chinese Strokes Chinese calligraphy consists of eight basic strokes. These are also the basic strokes of Chinese characters. These eight basic strokes are “horizontal” ( #% héng , “vertical” ( & shu) ,“brush left” (4%  , “press down and drag” (#4 na) , “dot” (5 dian) , “flick” (Hk tido) ,“hook” (44 gou) , and “corner fold” (4% zhé . They are used to teach beginners to write Chinese characters. Basic Strokes Stroke Evite iy (Otero Direction of stroke 21Soe ER SRE 1 Self-Assessment Checklist I can use greetings. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can use simple phrases to introduce people. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can use simple phrases to discuss likes/dislikes. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can use simple phrases to express gratitude. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 22ARO a AY RA My Family & @ +® Learning Objectives Topic: % A Family Members + Learning to talk about people in my family members and their names. + Learning to describe people, places, and possessions. + Learning to talk about the number of people in a family.24 é te Yijun x Antong a) s Zhe shi w6 jia. Qing jin. RH Re HH iB! | (ait RR KF! | :  piaoliang de fangzi! [They enter Yijun’s house.] te Yijun & Antong te Yijun B a a HLIRARBR? : Qing zud! Yao bu yao hé cha? SF > Htat (Ro MR AIRS RA : Hao, xi ni. Ni jia you hén duo zhaopian. He RA AB IR BK $248 © : W6  dou hén xihuan zhaoxiang. =DDO) mea mes aoe My Family if xe fa) : ik RRA RATA c 3B Re? MR tad H ? nO Antong : Zhe zhang zhaopian hén haokan. Zhe shi shé Ni jié ma? te > Re? RR Heke ERK SE > HHS © Yijun : Bu shi, shi w6 méi  shi w6 baba, mama. op o . x fe) > TR RA ABR EA © Antong +  dou hén haokan. : This is my house. Please come in. : This is a pretty house. : Please have a seat. Would you like some tea? : Yes, thank you. You have a lot of pictures in your house. : The people in my family like to take pictures. : This is a nice picture. Who is this? Your older sister? : No, that is my younger sister. These are my dad and mom. : The people in your family are very good-looking. Ceo beme ee lela el \ 02-2 People in the dialogue 1 RNG Zhang Yijun i a a woman from Taiwan mE Sr nn, & a man from the Republic of 2 i [a] Ma Antong wo Rh Honduras Vocabulary 3 a de a (Ptc) modification marker 4 BAK  a (N) _ family (members) 5 Re jia 3 (N) home, house 6 2S pidoliang a 2 (Vs) _ pretty 25———- FRPRREZ1 7 EF fangzi Le (N) house Ae zuod A (Vi) to sit 9 AF hao ve (Ptc) OK 10 A you zy (Vst) to have 11 % duo x (Vs-pred) many 12 aR zhaopian on q (N) photo 13 3 dou 2 (Adv) all, both 14 8848 zhaoxiang Q a (V-sep) to take a photo rr 16 kA haokan Te (Vs) good-looking 17. shé a (N) who 18 4H4e8 ji&jie a3 (N) older sister 19 RHR méi na (N) younger sister 20 ee baba eae (N) dad 21 4545 mama one (N) mom Phrases 22. Sie qing jin S 4 Please come in! PEN Cost tem Ot N 02-3 26LESSON ¢ 2 ¢ ay RA My Family BA = +: BP ie | Rie! a ie» Minghua : Tidnzhong, huanying! Huanying! Qing jin. DH Pt Aye Tianzhong *  66: wR HS Minghua : Tidnzhong, zhé shi w6 mama. 2 (Ak Wate Tianzhong * Bomt, nin hao. BAS OHEHE : MRF > MRA eo RI RI RI Be th 4 EE BE 2 Minghua de mama ; Ni hao, ni hao. Lai! Lai! Lai! Qing zud. Ni jiao shén mingzi? BH PP + Ry th—o I RARS Fe Tianzhong : W6jiao  Nimen jia yOu hén dud shi. aA = > ah eR A HH Fo te ve HEH AR BR AZ - Minghua : Dou shi wd gé de shi. Ta shi ldoshi, ta hén xihudn kanshi. DAE OIHELE + ah— - MRA RMA PRA RA LAK? Minghua de mama ¢:  ni jia you ji ge rén Ni ySu méi you xidngdi jié ® P RRA RDA? KA 1 he > Tianzhong : W6jia you wt ge rén wo you lidng ge méi ies a Coca ra Minghua_ : Tianzhong, welcome, welcome. Please come in. Tianzhong : Thank you! Minghua_ : Tianzhong, this is my mom. Tianzhong : Mrs. Li (Lit. “Auntie’”), how are you? 27————* EARPXRRE1 Minghua’s mother : Hello. Come in. Come. Please have a seat. What’s your name? Tianzhong : My name is Chengyi. You have a lot of books. Minghua_: They are all my brother’s books. He is a teacher. He likes to read. Minghua’s mother : Chengyi, how many people are there in your family? Do you have any brothers or sisters? Tianzhong : There are five people in my family. I have two younger sisters. CeO P eel e \ 02-4 People in the dialogue 1 BP ak ae Be iL- aman from Japan  Vocabulary aunt; here a polite term for 2 AQ FE bomit wa (N) a friend’s mother regardless of age 3 aR nin 2, (N) you (honorific) 4 4S mingzi 1? (N) name 5 = shi x (N) book 6 aap gé a (N) older brother 7 x Bip laoshi 2 P (N) teacher 8 A = kansha ee (V-sep) to read 9 & ji 4 (N) how many 10 {4 ge a (M) general measure word 11 méi My (Adv) not 12 x xidngdi d 2 (N) brothers 13 Sak jié ar (N) sisters 4 wit os (N) five 15 wy liang 2 (N) two 28My Family LESSON « 2 ¢ Ray RA I, &) de possessive Function: 49 de is used to show possession and is placed between the possessor and the object possessed. @ KHz @ teria w6 de shi nimen de zhaopian my book your photo @ #4 6p e448 O FTO eH Li ldoshi de jigjie gé de ldosht teacher Li’s sister brother’s teacher O R15 CO RNA w6 mama women laosht my mom our teacher Structures: Notice that 49 de is sometimes omitted, e.g., 5 & 6 above. 1. If the relationship between the possessor and the possessed of the two nouns is close, 4 de can be omitted, e.g., HE wo baba ‘my dad’, KF wo gé ‘my brother’, #% 4% wo jia ‘my home’. Furthermore, the possessor has to be a pronoun when 4 de is omitted. So, one can say #44 6) Li  de baba “Mr. Li’s dad’, but not * 4 AA € Li  baba (omitting 44 de). 2. If the two nouns in a possessive relationship refer to an individual and his/ her affiliated group, the noun referring to the individual usually appears in the plural rather than the singular form. For example, for ‘his home’, it is #477 Z tamen jia (their home), 4#%4f] 8 4 women  (our Japan). 29————* ERP RRE1 _ eS ——— —————— Fill in the blanks and add 4) where appropriate. (Aa BSE Cee Didktk Eth Fett) O #_ CURB RE @ RAE HS O@ KR REF QO FE ERER? QO FRIAR GEH ? KY II. Modifier Marker 4 de Function: 49 de is used between the modifier and the head noun. O BB) O 3° a gE piaoliang de xi  de  pretty young lady tasty coffee O REAYWETF hén haokan de fangzi beautiful house Usage: Notice that 4) de can be omitted when the modifier and the head noun are used together frequently. For example, when talking about nationality, one says "f A?   rén ‘person from which country?’, rather than *#8 B] 89 A   de rén One says #3 A Taiwan rén ‘Taiwanese people’ rather than * 23 a) A Taiwan de rén 30LESSON « 2 ¢ RayRA My Family ; Make correct sentences by rearranging the order of the characters. O A R44 4 OH 448 ® @ ® ® ® @ BRB? ESGH#R O #4 RH OFT BR ® ® ® ® ® ®@ RRAIRG ° RER se OH BA RS HA OD @ ® @ {eRe Ls ZS Ill. 4 you possessive Function: The verb #4 you refers to possession or ownership. O KRARSRA W6 you hén dud zhaopian. I have many photos. Structures: O thi HAT -B a4 K ° Tamen you  de cha. They have good-tasting tea. A Sp Negation: # you is always negated with 7& méi O HK EF Ta méi you fangzi. He does not have a house. O HAR? AIMTRA BIE Ro aR Duibugqi, women méi you Wulong cha. Sorry, we don’t have any Oolong tea. O RRAE> W6 méi you shi. I don’t have a book. CO RRA RN Fath » W6 méi you xidngdi jié I don’t have any brothers or sisters. 31+ $APRRE1 I Questions: The A-not-A form for the verb 4 you is A A you méi you. O MIA RA HF & 89 oho “ak ? Nimen yé méi you  de kafei? Do you have good-tasting coffee? O A RIAA ? Ni you ji zhang zhaopian? How many photos do you have? O RMA BRAG ? Nimen you Wilong cha ma? Do you have Oolong tea? 4% 4} Exercise Make correct sentences by rearranging the order of the characters. QO RS RM HQeoye F ® @ ® ® © ATT BRMRH AR ® ®@ ® © O Hitt F BH ® @ ® ® IV. 2#§ dou totality Function: 2 dou is used to indicate that all items referred to by the subject or object noun have something in common. OD ARAPABLERR © Women dou xing  Weare all surnamed Chen. O BHA th (BF)  liang ge fangzi dou shi ta de (fangzi). Both of these two houses are his. 32 O he) LU PAAth APRA A ° Ta de xidngdi jié dou hén haokan. His siblings are all good looking.LESSON ¢ 2 ¢ RHRA My Family Structures: #8 dou is an adverb, which is placed after the noun it relates to and before the main verb phrase, i.e. Noun + 48 dou + VP. QO AMBLABA © QO RE EASE AB BG yoy © Women dou shi  rén Ni baba mama dou yao hé kafei. We are all American. Both your dad and mom want to drink + ay, coffee. O FAL R)bwemSKS Ro aR Li    dou xihuan hé cha. Mr. Liand Miss Chen both like to drink tea. F Negation: Noun + 28 dou +7 bir/ 3 méi + VP O AMAA RAB A © CO KT > Rasp A Women dou bi shi  rén BB AB ° None of us is American. W6 gé wo jié dou bu xihuan zhaoxiang. O KPA AA TH Women dou méi you gé Neither my brother nor my sister likes to take photos. None of us has any older brother. I Questions: O MBL ABAS ? QO RA RKAM BG Yoyes ? Nimen dou shi  rén ma? Ni de  dou yao hé  ma? Are you all American? Do all the people in your family want to drink coffee? Usage: 1. 48 dou is an adverb and appears before the verb and after the subject. It is not correct to say *2f 4% 4f] % 278 A Dou women shi Taiwan rén 2. Members of a group indicated by 4 dou all have to appear before 48 dou. For example, to say ‘I like both teachers Li and Wang’, one says # #4 > £2 6A > RAL H #e Li Laosht, Wang Laoshi, wd dou xihuan. It is incorrect to say *# ABR & bp > EER WO dou xihuan Li Laoshi, Wang Laoshi. 33+ FAP RRE1 3. In interrogatives, #8 dou works with the *% ma question form but not with A-not-A question forms. For example, to say ‘Are you all surnamed Wang?’, one can say (44h xt £°% ? Nimen dou xing Wang ma? but not * 4% 4948 ke #- +k £ ? Nimen dou xing bu xing Wang? 4. When 48 dou is modified by # bi, the sentence means ‘not all....’, e.g., #2477 4B 278 A © Tamen bu dou shi Taiwan rén ‘Not all of them are Taiwanese’. ee @& Ma. SAAB is ABA iS PSK AR A HARA ? of 2 o Fy 40 48 89 (88) ° QO RRA > ZF PRAY S QO RERHQws > HERG Ugh o —>Riy_ O RRA LAA > VRE ERIZ A LH AK © > FRA S O RFERM HARE ir’ ——— eee 34LESSON « 2 © RayRA MAUL V. Measures (4 ge and 4k zhang Function: Both 14 ge and # zhang are measures. When indicating a quantity, a measure word is placed between the number and the noun. QO —arst O Wiki A Ho BA yi ge gé liang zhang haokan de zhaopian one brother two pretty photos O Kass ? O FEMA? Ji ge laoshT? Na san ge rén How many teachers? Which three people? Structures: 1. Number + Measure + Noun (1) S1BA (2) GRAB ? san ge rén Ji zhang zhaopian? three people How many photos? 2. Determiner + Number + Measure + Noun (1) AB— FARA? Na yi zhang zhaopian? Which photo? When the number following 48 nd is — yi ‘one’, the number is often omitted. For example, %§ 18 A ? Na yi ge rén ‘which person?’ is the same as f4é] A?  ge rén Usage: 1. There are many measure words in Chinese. Different measure words are used with different nouns. In this lesson, only two measure words are introduced. { ge is the most frequently used measure word and is used as the measure for many different nouns. $& zhang is usually used with nouns that designate flat objects such as paper, photographs, and tables. When learning a new noun, you need to pay attention to the measure words that can be used with it. 35———- $RPRR#1 2. When the numeral is “two”, you do not say “ = ér + measure + noun”, rather you say “ Fy Jiang + measure + noun”, e.g., my + Measure + Noun my «18 SRR liang ge méi (two younger sisters) m 18 HAA __ liang ge  rén (two Japanese people) my oe RRA liang zhang zhaopian (two photos) & B Exercise Place numbers and measure words in the blanks based on the nouns shown 36LESSON « 2 © RARA I. Counting from 1 to 10 RSS Se RS, Zz +5 yi ér san a oa in qi 7 ii a II. Other People’s Families Goal: Learning to ask about people in your friend’s family. Task: Ask your classmates the following questions. Write down what you find out. es Rae ae Example Classmate 1 | Classmate 2 | RRA BABA ? BBA | | | | . A WAP / ada / RA RA A Hak ? RAR Dist? | te RB ALAR et iz WEA HY HBB 2 ] | WRB MRA AB OB ko +98 ee ? SBR MRE NR RAL EL Bh OB opo JE in BR ABABA i MRR AAB BRA PR RABMPR BM 37ERP RRL pa a a - > SS 7 III. Introducing Your Family Goal: Learning to talk about family members’ likes/dislikes. Task: While one person introduces his/her family, other students complete the table below using information provided by the speaker. (Fill in the form using Chinese characters or pinyin.) ice ee Ea ace Family | Who likes ee eer) 0 se eee Vee se) 5 ee ad . Who has members __ to take “ebro ite PwC mey @ coffee? UCaatigeces books? IV. People, Things, and Events Goal: Use simple sentences to describe people, things, and events. Task: Pair up with a partner and discuss the following questions based on the pictures provided below. Then tell the class your results of your discussion. 38My Family QO H-KRART Na yi zhang zhaopian vitoltane? Which photo is pretty? PHM | [sasney me H | O #HFRS ?  de shit hén duo? Who has a lot of books? O #FEKAE?  bu xihuan kanshii? Who doesn’t like to read? KS 8 0 HEP | RE we LESSON ¢ 2 ¢ RH RA O tix? Tamen shi shé Who are they? [Fae (f4w & O #HEEERR?  de baba xihuan zhaoxiang? Whose dad likes to take pictures? ms (-\ T=] PRA A RA O BAW HWR?  you  de cha? Who has good-tasting tea? ‘rl (Me [RAK 39Sr HY RE 1 Oreo Family Central to Chinese Culture The family is central to Chinese culture. Chinese 7 / parents expect to live with their children, especially their sons. In the past, sons always lived with their parents, even after they were married. Sons would also receive the family inheritance, while the daughters would not. Daughters were considered “members of someone else’s family” once they got married, so they did not live with their parents, nor did they receive any inheritance from them. Family get together In modern society, it is becoming increasingly difficult to find a family with three generations under one roof, but it is still common to find married couples living near their parents/in-laws, sometimes even next door. Being in close proximity allows them to look after each other easily. Since many young Taiwanese couples work, they opt to have their parents look after their children instead of hiring a professional nanny. Having grandparents look after your children saves money and you don’t have to worry about leaving your children with a stranger. For their part, the grandparents are generally more than happy to be surrounded by their grandkids. More and more people in Taiwan today are also waiting longer to get married. Traditionally, single adults are still children in Chinese culture. As such, many single adults in their 30s and 40s still live with their parents and their parents continue to look after them. Family trip Family celebration 40LESSON ¢ 2 ¢ RHMRA Notes on Pinyin and Pronunciation 1. Pinyin Rules: When the vowel “i” stands alone (without a consonant in front of it), it is spelled yi (—) . When the vowel “u” stands alone, it is spelled wi (Z) . 2. Tone Changes for — Yi (1) When — is used in names or in ordinal number, its tone does not undergo changes, e.g. Tidnzhong  ( # 'P #— ) and  (#—@®) . (2) When — yTis used to signify an amount (followed by quantifiers) or when it appears in multisyllabic words, it follows the same tone change rules as # bu. — yi+1", 2™ or 3“ tone> 4"tone | — y+ 4™ tone or neutral tone (4™ tone mark) > 2™ tone (2™ tone mark) ak (M) & (M) (14) + (N) (14) : 41 (M) nN i Vv 7 \ — 2 (13) — #& (14) Vv #& (M) (L4) @ (N) (14) Note: When pronouncing “-o,” it is natural to pronounce it with a slight “u”, as in 14 b(u)6, 4 ® zhoum(u)o in Lesson Three, and #3 wéi in Lesson Four. Introduction to Chinese Characters Basic Structures of Chinese Characters: [a Se yl rén ri : li yao xidng shi tee HEL a rE Re ni xing dou cha co a [oo] a ka xié men guo Seo 4—————* ERPRRE1 den Wr Aes a Be Ae zhé ying = qi me fang you ies a] Rls Fels é tong wen jian Has es you qu Basic Template for Chinese Calligraphy To write beautiful Chinese characters, tidiness, balance, symmetry, and harmony are important. Nine-square grids are used to practice writing characters to achieve balanced beauty. ro aN ge ae Nine-square grids used for writing practice consist of nine boxes in 3x3 grids. Since Chinese characters can be as simple as “—” or as complicated as “34”, to achieve balance, symmetry, harmony, and fullness, they must occupy the same amount of space, regardless of how many strokes they have, when written in 3x3 grids. Nine-square grids are a basic tool used for practicing the writing of Chinese characters. Beginners who use the grids to help them layout the structure of Chinese characters will eventually achieve balance in their writing. Se Coecnto ae tro atc I can discuss people in my family and their names. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can describe people, places and possessions in simple terms. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% TTS I can talk about the number of people in a family. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 42oe: BAT FE? What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? Bf Learning Objectives Topic: 447 Hobbies + Learning to describe likes/dislikes (e.g., sports and movies). + Learning to express what two groups have in common. + Learning to politely ask others their opinions and make simple suggestions. + Learning to form choice questions.ce ane ae What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? Eckel Ue \\, 03-1 é & a Antong » | Tidnzhong & (a) |  » Tianzhong & (a) | Antong » Tidnzhong 44 me > te Bik ae THB 2 Tianzhong, ni xihuan ting yin ma? RA BRT THe HR BK EH W6 bu xihuan ting yinyue. Wo xihuan yundong. Ve BAK IT ER ? Ni xihuan da wangqit ma? RA BIR tT WR © W6 bu xihuan da wangqiu. VR aK th HE ? Ni xihuan zuo shén 47 PEER Fo DEK VR YE? Da bangqit han youyong, ni ne?LESSON © 3° BRMHE ? What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? © R Dt RBT ER oH RR- Antong s W6 chang da lanqit, yé chang ti ziqit. DB PF : Beet By REAR AEH» Tianzhong : W6juéde ti zuqit hén hdowan. . & A): AA RMR? KIT FLEWRR> CBR? Antong : Mingtian shi zhoumo.  zadoshang qu fi ziqil, zé ® os ke oy | Tianzhong :; Haoa! 22% = Text in English Antong : Tianzhong, do you like listening to music? Tianzhong : I don’t like listening to music. I like to exercise. Antong : Do you like to play tennis? Tianzhong : | don’t like to play tennis. Antong : What do you like to do? Tianzhong : Play baseball and swim. And you? Antong : Loften play basketball and also often play soccer. Tianzhong : I think soccer is fun. Antong : The weekend is tomorrow. How about we go play soccer tomorrow morning? Tianzhong : Great! 45oERP CRE CER ele tae | \ 03-2 Vocabulary 1 wR zhoumo an (N) weekend 2 Fe, ting = (V) to listen 3 ay ae yin Sok (N) music 4 3B S} yundong uh XR (Vi) to exercise 5 FT da 2. (V) to play (ball games) 6 4 ERK wangqit x (N) tennis 7 Hs ER bangqit R s (N) baseball 8 Fa han BS (Conj) and, as well as 9 BR youyong x oe (V-sep) to swim 10 chang L (Adv) often 11 GER lanqit 2S (N) basketball 12. + yé Y (Adv) also 13 A tf * (V) to kick 14 ER zuqiu v £ (N) soccer 15 AE jué 4 3 (Vst) to feel, to think 16 «45 haowan ye ye (Vs) interesting, fun 17 WAR mingtian 2 : (N) tomorrow 18 Fk zaoshang ane (N) morning 19 £¢ qu SS (V) to go How about it? 20 & AK zé ia (Vs) How does that sound? What do you think? 21 Py a Y (Ptc) sentence-final particle Phrases 22 BAA BE zu shén ae do what 23 HFT hioa vey OK 46What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? ¥ 2% — Dialogue II \ \ LESSON ¢ 3° RMHE ? 03-3 4a Rtyt A  4o Ruyu A  4a Ruyu A  40 Ruyu A  & Is oT SR ME RIM HK BER GARB? : Jintian wanshang women qu kan dianying, hao bt hao? 3F FT | : Hao a! wv z 3 Sek Pe ke GAREY BLES EK? : Ni xiang kan  dianying haishi Taiwan dianying? AMEX ENE? RBA? :  dianying, Taiwan dianying, w6 dou xiang kan. A EM EW | Women kan Taiwan dianying ba! HI! a ERTS PRe : Hao a! Kan dianying ké xué  a L RA RAV] WAR? : Wanshang yao bt yao yiqi chi wanfan? te > RIV HK AH Zo Hao, women qt chi  cai. 47—— RP RRB 1 ZAM cere eT Ruyu : Let’s go see a movie tonight, OK? Yuemei : Sure. Ruyu : Do you want to see an American movie or a Taiwanese movie? Yuemei —_: Either an American movie or a Taiwanese film is fine with me. Ruyu : Let’s go ahead and see a Taiwanese movie. Yuemei __: That’s fine. Watching movies, I can learn Chinese. Ruyu : Would you like to have dinner together tonight? Yuemei _—_: Okay. Let’s go have Vietnamese food. ESOP eat \ 03-4 People in the dialogue 1 awk Bai Ruy 2) 8, oy a woman from the US Vocabulary 2 BR jintian 2 : (N) today 3 ag, wanshang ya (N) evening, night 4 A kan 3 (V) to see, to watch 5 Ex dianying 2 i (N) movie 6 aR ni 2 (N) you (female) 7 #a xiang x (Vaux) to want, to think 8 baad x haishi oe PS (Conj) or (used in a question) 9 We, ba 5 (Ptc) sentence-final particle for suggestion 10 FLA ké B- (Vaux) could (possibility) 11 @ xué i (V) to learn, to study 12 Y St Zhongwen x ae (N) Chinese language 13 —#8 yiqi =% (Adv) together 48LESSON ¢ 3 ¢ BRM ? What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? 14 uy, chi 4 (V) to eat 15 8, BR wanfan Be SS (N) dinner 16 xX cai a (N) cuisine Names 17 Aa  Be Vietnam Phrases How about...? 7 18 4 AF hao bi hao r, » < xe mT How does that sound? SO Merete \ I. Placement of Time Words Structures: Time words appear after (mostly) or before (less commonly) the subject. QO RIMNFREA ER ° O MARBRARAS ? Women jintian qu kan dianying. Ni mingtian xiang qu yOuyong ma? We went to see a movie today. Would you like to go swimming tomorrow? O BRMZAH ER? Zhoumo ta yao qu da langit. 8 aA R MR #8 BL + FB ? This weekend, he is going to go play Mingtian ni xiang zud shén basketball. What would you like to do tomorrow? Usage: Units of time in a series are expressed from larger to smaller. For example, 1. 9A AA*_E mingtiin wanshang (tomorrow evening) *ae LAA 2. #4 -Z_E zhoumo zaoshang (in the morning on the weekend) +P LAR 49EARP RRE 1 Complete with time words and sentences. BSH ER: RP 06 RE HEH te REAM RBR EER? KAEBBREA BBE ? RAPA EUR ° 4b, Ave AH HK BEA EHS? II. To Go Do Something with + qi Function: < gi + VP indicates the intention to go do something. QO RETR? O HEYLR? Wo qu da wangqiu. Ta qu ti zuqiu. I am going to go play tennis. He went to play soccer. O AMM SeHMEA EH ° Women han ldoshi dou qu kan dianying. We and the teacher are all going to go see a movie.LESSON ¢ 3° WRAHE ? What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? Structures: Negation markers, auxiliary verbs, and adverbs are placed before # qu. # Negation: O RFK ER > O ARFLKRFKAH IR © WoO bt qu da lanqit. Mingtian zaoshang wo bu qu  I am not going to go play Iam not going to go swimming basketball. tomorrow morning. x Questions: O RREREBSE? O WME TCAHRS ? Ni yao qu kan dianying ma? Nimen chang qu chi Yuenan cai ma? Would you like to go see a movie? Do you often go eat Vietnamese food? O HAEHERS ? Ta bu qu da banggqitt ma? Is he not going to go play baseball? RB Exercise Complete the sentences below based on the pictures provided using 4 + VP. O AAZLRM—HA : O FARERAER C O ib KF 0 ? O RRS ARELE O REGANBER? KT en, 51—+ tAPxRe1 III. Topic Sentences 52 Function: When you want to describe, explain, or evaluate a person, event, or thing, you place the person, event, or thing at the beginning of the sentence as the “topic”. The rest of the sentence serves as the “comment”. The topic of a sentence is usually the person or thing that is placed at the beginning of the sentence. @O A SEASKSE SHAS? B: Taiwan rén xihuan hé Wilong cha ma? Do Taiwanese people like to drink Oolong tea? WRAP AP Oy Ho ta® ? @ A: Do you have any brothers and sisters? ¥ Fe 2 = UBRAADEDBRE Teh TE Ni xiang kan  dianying haishi © A: Taiwan dianying? Do you want to watch an American movie or a Taiwanese movie? BRR BIS AMERG © Wiilong cha, Taiwan rén dou xihuan hé Oolong tea, Taiwanese people all like to drink (it). >A dd? RPRFA Brothers, sisters, I have none. AREY EWEW R BARA °  dianying, Taiwan dianying, wo dou xiang kan. American movie, Taiwanese movie, I would like to watch either. Structures: Topics are always placed at the very beginning of a sentence. . 5 zy QO HRR: RFEK: Da bangqit, wo bu xihuan. Playing baseball, I don’t like (it). © BIR > REAR ° Zhe zhang zhaopian, w6 jué hén haokan. This photo, I think (it) is quite nice. @ RHR KH  cai, w6 chang chi. Vietnamese food, I often eat (it). Usage: In a topic-comment sentence, if the fronted object consists of a collective noun, or more than one noun, the totality marker, 48 dou is required. @ PAX? RABBMZ © (collective noun) Zhongguo cai, wo dou xihuan chi. Chinese food, I like to eat (them) all.LESSON « 3 ¢ RMIT ? What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? 8 HH > tht > FLABA © (two object nouns) Didi, méi w6 dou you. Younger brothers and younger sisters, I’ve got both. Complete the topic-comment sentences. QO KRFHADER » aa RPA O KRRAWRRRH > > BAAR ° O A: RERBSBRARARR? B: Ks KR > RARAG O A! RERAAH RRR ESR ? B: fa > ° O A! RA FH HF teKH ? B: Fo > KR ° © A: Ry BR PRR? B: RE z sd IV. The Word Order of Adverbs 4, yé 28 dou and % chang Structures: 1. 44 yé 48 dou and % chdng are adverbs. Adverbs modify verbs. Adverbs always occur before the verb in Chinese. th yé / 48 dou / '% chang + VP 53ERP RR 1 ed kstol(er- 14-3 2. When yé and either #8 dou or %% chdng occur in a sentence together to modify the VP, 4 yé is placed before 48 dou or ** chang. RAKA> Subject RA ARA? wah RRABRR 1A? ep BRB HA TAR BACAR HR ahiR BR CAH R © Hip 9B oho ede > wt 2 wha edt UR HE BRE > Bh KW LER © Negation: In negation, +4, yé is placed before the negation markers # bi / i% méi while #% chdng is placed after 7 bu. #8 dou can occur before or after 7 bi, but it changes the meaning of the sentence. RARRARA? te E O RRARR >? WRA tKH ° AAA. Wo méi you didi, yé méi you méi @ __ Wo bi shi  rén ta yé bu shi  I don’t have a younger brother or a rén younger sister. I am not Japanese and he is not, either. 54LESSON ¢ 3 © @RMH AE ? What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? O HAEKAEH? RUA O KRATEEB» BRAER Wo bi ching kan dianying, Ta bi xihuan kan dianying, w6 yé bu I don’t watch movies often. xihuan kan dianying. = He doesn’t like to watch movies and I oe 404" * 2p R&R A Ae don’t like to watch movies, either. ( R AK wR? A A oN A ) Tamen bt dou shi  rén (YOu O RMBARABA ©  rén yé yu  rén Women dou bu shi  rén Not all of them are American. (There None of us is American. are Americans, and there are Japanese.) Ctra Complete with 4 , #8 or #. PRAE BR ™R? BH oporyf RHR BR ° RARAAA Hh ss RRAAA? RRA? ss RH HBB Woe) RAB BRAT MR RRA BRIT ER © BAP A if By RFR ° LA BER ° x eer V. Making Suggestions " ba Function: *@, ba indicates a suggestion from the speaker. A: Beir aH mos k eB A ? Women qu hé  haishi hé cha? 0 Shall we go drink coffee or tea? Bi RAMS yo ybow, © Women qu hé  ba. Let’s go drink coffee. 55+ $APRRe1 O A: FARELBRINAH BER ? Jintian wanshang women kan shén dianying? What movie are we watching tonight? Bi: AMKZ EBERT ! Women qu kan Taiwan dianying ba. Let’s watch a Taiwanese movie. O A: BRARIMNAH ER HAW? Zhoumod women qu da lanqit, hao bu hao? Let’s go play basketball on the weekend, OK? Bi RABRH ER MMT AR ! WoO bu xihuan da langit, women da wangqiu ba! I don’t like to play basketball. Let’s play tennis. Structures: "2, ba is placed at the sentence-final position. Usage: °@ ba is used in imperatives to soften the command. For example, °§"® °  ba. An imperative without "@ ba sounds harsh and direct and can be impolite, for example, 3 ! He! ae > Claet o) Complete with suitable suggestions. BTS Ht EX ? BRATS SHAT | BAPTA TE ? RACES RT | BANA H EER ? RIMAAAE Be | O A: KMAAKRLAH BER ? RMS PSR HO > RAVER ZMH FE ? 56LESSON ¢ 3 ¢ BRMH+H ? What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? I. What Does This Person Like to Do? Goal: Learning to describe what kind of sports or activities a person likes. Task 1: Look at the pictures below and say what the person in the picture often does in the morning and in the evening. What did he do today? | BE Morning Ae | Evening Task 2: Look at the pictures again and answer the following questions. O HHASBRRFH ER? CO MFDRREAR TBA? 8 Peers e II. Making Suggestions Goal: Learning to ask someone’s opinion in a polite way and offer a suggestion. Task: Tomorrow is the weekend. Discuss what to do on the weekend with your classmates. Have three students role play the conversation below, using the pictures above. Al BR RIKR > ARH EE ? Bi Ae Ci: RARER le A:RAER RI RP B >> RAPHE ! 57—. #APxme1 III. Find What You Have in Common Goal: Learning to talk about what two people or groups of people have in common. Task: Look at the chart below and try to discover what the people listed on it have in common. Do not repeat common points that somebody has already mentioned. a QO RFQs > Eb H| ms Wo chang hé kafei, XidoWang yé chang hé  I often drink coffee. Xiao Wang also drinks coffee often. O Rit tht % AMRF DER ° Women han ta didi dou hén chang youyong. We and his brother often go swimming. 1 % * & 8 FF © & F F RR KF B & hk Kk F tr KR YH 8B + Fk A wy A 8 Tt M@ t47t HR k A BA + £ KF BR R B R aS % ER ER A HR v v UR v v v v v te, v v PY v v Ae APY v v TREK v v te, B v v Beek eR v Bal so v v hE v v 58LESSON ¢ 3 ¢ BRA ? What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? IV. Survey Goal: Learning to ask and reply to choice questions (choosing between two or more items). Task: This is a survey. Ask your classmates questions using the activities shown in the squares below as prompts and report your findings. At MERA ERB RY RR? Ni xihuan da lanqiti haishi ti zigiu? Do you like to play basketball or soccer? B: REN EIR BERYRUR © W6 xihuan da lanqit, yé xihuan ti zuqiu. I like basketball and also like soccer. ~ ay EE > + 3h) > REMIT BR > FER UR © W6 xihuan da langit, bu xihuan tr zuqiu. I like basketball. I don’t like soccer. KE > > . + ab) tT EER DRI? RARER © Da lanqit, ti zuqit, w6 dou bu xihuan. Both basketball and soccer, I don’t like. Write the number of people that like the various activities below in the boxes provided and report your findings. Ra | LMA BR ER © Wt ge rén xihuan da lanqit. Five people like to play basketball. av + FE AZ 8 BK Liang ge rén bu chang hé cha. Two people seldom drink tea. 59————- ERPRRA1 pa aS » > > (Za Bk mE ik 4% (Results ) iT BRR By LER 96, Be ~AAR KHER BAER EB EX 4% (Results ) a a a BED 47 HER 0 ohare 08% DODD DDDDDD1D 1 60LESSON © 3 ¢ BARA E ? What Are You Doing Over the Weekend? Soi aot Shrimp fishing is a one-of-a-kind leisure activity found only in Taiwan. It is popular among locals and foreigners living in Taiwan and can be found on many travel itineraries for tourists. The shrimp caught at shrimp-fishing sites are raised specifically for that purpose. The facilities are open to the public who is charged by the hour. Shrimp fishing originated in southern Taiwan in the Shrimp-fishing site 1980s and gradually spread to the rest of Taiwan. The first venues were outdoors, but shrimp fishing eventually became an indoor activity as enthusiasts wanted to stay out of the sun and weather. An indoor shrimp-fishing facility is a great place to spend half a day. You can roast the shrimp you catch or have them roasted by the staff and eat them right there. There are many ways to cook shrimp, but nothing beats eating roasted shrimp and drinking beer. This laid-back leisure activity is a good way to relieve stress and a great escape F from the hustle and bustle of daily life. “ Shrimp ready to roast Roasted shrimp jae: ERS. iin (HAR) BHI A Shrimp caught 61—————e FRPP XR 1 Notes on Pinyin and Pronunciation Pinyin Rules e599 ce 99 “ is preceded by the consonant “j”, “q”, or “x,” the umlaut (the two dots 1 “i? When the vowe above the letter) is omitted, e.g., jué (4) . When it is not preceded by any consonant, it is spelled yu (#). When the vowel “i” is followed by the vowel “a”, “o”, or “e” and is not preceded by consonant, change the “i” to a “y”, e.g., -iao > yao (#) ,-ie > yé () . Introduction to Chinese Characters Using Components to Learn Chinese Characters Learning Chinese characters requires familiarizing yourself with their pronunciations, meanings, and form. The form (structure of Chinese characters) consists of structures with three tiers: the entire character itself, components, and strokes. Components are the basic units of Chinese characters Components are the smallest writing unit to Chinese characters. They fall between strokes and radicals (strokes < components S radicals) and are the core structures of Chinese writing. Independent characters have only one component and compound characters have at least two components. For example, the character in “4?” has two components: “#¢” and “+ .” Bok F The character “4” (happy) has three components: “@ ,” “4 ,” and “A .” Wot 4EtyutR 62LESSON ° 3° BRMHE ? The most effective way to learn characters Using components to learn Chinese characters helps the learner break down the complicated forms of characters and makes learning easier. Components also help the learner understand characteristics of Chinese characters and speeds up word recognition and learning, while helping build up word repertoire. 63+ FAP xRe1 SE aCe a isto acs I can describe likes/dislikes (e.g., sports and movies). 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can express what two groups have in common. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% ——— I can politely ask other’s opinions and make simple suggestions. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can form choice questions. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 64aR ze] -—H SD Be? Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? & Y A + Learning Objectives Topic: 344 Shopping + Learning to ask and talk about prices. + Learning to ask for reasons. + Learning to use simple phrases to describe the size and function of common objects.Set meme DC VCs Cm I \ 66 ; # k Laoban aA Minghua # Laoban aA Minghua # Laoban aA Minghua & f Laoban S 2a eh] - HD RR? Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? 04-1 aH] RB RAE ?  ni yao mai shén > — FR BR eek c ry 1) LF : Yi   kafei. Liang ge baozi. TRB KR PPR BR) HR? Ni yao da  zhong  haishi xiao  ! KK: UF HB KR HR © Da  Baozi qing bang w6 wéi > dFa0 ° aah] sha oe NA? Haode. Qingwen waidai haishi  Shite > —H BD BR? Waidai, yigong dudshao qian? wa AF > aF wet: -k—-B=t we «  bashi, baozi sishi, yigong yibai ér kuai.LESSON * $e HH-HS YR? Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? 38 SC #2 Textin English Store owner: Excuse me, what would you like (to order)? Minghua : Acup of hot coffee and two baozi. Store owner: Would you like a large, medium, or small cup? Minghua_ : Large. Please microwave the baozi for me. Store owner: OK. Excuse me. Is this to go or for here? Minghua_ : To go. How much does that cost altogether? Store owner: 80 for the coffee, 40 for the baozi. That will be 120 in total. cee ete laa | W 04-2 Vocabulary 1 —H yigong = B (Adv) altogether 2 & 2h dudshao 2 Fo (N) how much, how many 3 Z29 qian s (N) money 4 x FA laoban Be (N) store-owner, boss 5 a mai Be (V) to buy 6 KR bi R (M) cup 7 ah re Ex (Vs) hot 8 af baozi 2+ () Satine fine with meat 9 eB yao x (V) to want, to need 10 xX da aa (Vs) large 11 ?w zhong x (Vs-attr) medium 12. Jy xido x (Vs) small 13 a bang Fe (Prep) for 14. ke wéi x, 2 (V) to microwave 15 Ba bai Z (N) hundred 16 a kuai i (M) measure word for Chinese money 67—- $APRRA1 Phrases 17 FAY haode iy 8 OK 18 Sp aE waidai an take out, to go 19 WAR  wa for here 04-3 —¥— | ‘ A > RRR — RM FRR  : W6 xiang mai yi zhi xin shouji. a we Oo FRR IR Fo AH BA HH ah ? Minghua : Nide shouji hén hao.  yao mai xin de? A a SR RFRA BT RUG?  : W6 zhé zhi shouji tai jit: le, bu haokan. aA =: oy ROR OO 4 FR ? Minghua : Ni xiang mai na zhong shouji? A fe AAA + fe 1 A  :  zhaoxiang yé néng shangwang. we - bl ye 68LESSON ¢ # * HRI—HS YR? ical Ca ae oe a ee é é aA # ARF FMR IG RAFAR—Re Minghua : Na zhdng shduji hén hao, w6 gé you yi zhi. ._ eB Be ab > z. A FLSHRRP- RRS R?  : Gui bt gui? Yi zhi mai dudshao qian? | aA 2: A MPeMA RMR -KLR-BAtS Minghua : Na zhdng shOuji ba pidnyi. Yi zhi yao yiwan wiqian dud. 28 SC 32 2% Text in English Yuemei —_: I want to buy anew cell phone. Minghua_: Your cell phone is fine. Why do you want to buy a new one? Yuemei : This one of mine is too old. It’s unattractive. Minghua_ : What kind of cell phone do you want to buy? Yuemei : (One that) can take pictures and go online. Minghua =: Those kinds of cell phones are good. My brother has one. Yuemei : Are they expensive? How much does one cost? Minghua_ : That kind of cell phone is not cheap. One costs over NT$15,000. 4 2) = Vocabulary II \ 04-4 Vocabulary _ measure word for cell 1 x zhi * Os) phones 2 A xin z (Vs) new 3 + H& shouji io (N) cell phone 4 K tai A (Adv) too 5 #£ jid 4 (Vs) old sentence-final particle 6 7 le eZ (Ptc) indicating the speaker’s sense of certainty 69+ $APxRe1  zhong x (M) kind, type 8 AE néng We (Vaux) can, to be able to to access the internet, to 4 j A ay a ° 7 1 shangwang an (v-sep) use the internet 10 Af na/néi PES (Det) that 11 = gui x (Vs) expensive 12 a mai 3 (V) to sell ceo, a : . 13 {8 & pianyi = = (Vs) cheap, inexpensive 14 yao as (Vst) to take, to require 15 wan 3 (N) ten thousand 1460 F qian $ (N) thousand Phrases 17 Att BE wéi ee why I. Measures 3% kuai, + bei, X zhi and #€ zhong Structures: 1. A measure word is needed when a noun is modified by a number. (1) —4R ajo oF yi   cup of coffee (2) + & FF 1% shi zhi shduji_ ten (units of) cell phones (3) =14 e x, san ge didi three younger brothers 2. Determiners 22 zhé 4 na, “48 nd precede the words measures shown in Structure 1-(1), — yris usually omitted. Det + Numeral + Measure + N (1) 38 Fy AR AA horde — HH ob BE ?  liang    yigong dudshao qian? How much in total is it for these two cups of hot coffee? 70LESSON © £ e HPI-# 5 YR? Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? (2) MER FRAGT Na san zhi shOuji tai jit le. Those three cell phones are too old. (3) HS (—) FRA EF ? Na (yi) zhong shouji bi gui? Which type of cell phone is not expensive? ee Please fill in the blanks with measure words. Qo ° 8 | BA opodt = + BIRR F RAB HEE AR] ETE AB ARG & HK ° SS fai + & QO # FURIE « oF Fie ? II. Preposition *% bang on behalf of Function: # bang introduces the beneficiary of an action. O HHAMKas- @ HAN — it - Qing bang w6 wéi baozi. Qing bang w6 mai yi  kafei. Please microwave the baozi for me. Please buy acup of coffee for me. O AE RBia » Qing bang wo zhaoxiang. Please take a picture for me. Structures: SF Negation: The negation marker # bi is placed before the preposition ¥ bang, not before the verb. 71—+ $A Pree O AFT RRR LF ° Cte TRA GR F ° ) Ta bu bang w6 wéi baozi . He won’t microwave the baozi for me. O BARE HR Rot (MHA oh RO epost ©) Jigjie bu bang didi mai  Sister won’t buy coffee for brother. O LALA RRR MAA (SEAL DRA Miao ) Wang  bu bang w6 zhaoxiang. Mr. Wang would not take a picture for me. £ Questions: O WEARER FH? O 8 rR ta ? Ni bang bu bang ta mai shouji? Ta bang ni zhaoxiang ma? Are you going to buy a cell phone Did he take a photo for you? on his behalf? O HEV RAMRRAF?  néng bang Antong wéi baozi? Who can microwave a baozi for Antong? Complete the sentences below with the beneficiary # bang. a eo _ ae Ad Lt A BA ° FAB wordt aA UR aA UR 72LESSON ¢ 4 ¢ #HPI-#K SPR? Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? III. & De-phrase with the Head Noun Omitted Function: Nouns are always ‘modified’ or described using this structure: modifier 4) + head noun. When the head noun is clear from the context, the head noun is often omitted. O A: KBRMFRBRE FR? Ni yao mai xin sh6uji haishi jit. shoujt? Do you want to buy a new cell phone or an old one? B: KRRMH? FRB? W6 yao xin de, bt yao jill de. I want a new one. I don’t want an old one. O A: MFRAAR ? Xin shduji gui bu gui? Are new cell phones expensive? B: WARE ° Xin de hén gui. New ones are expensive. Structures: F Negation: O KH FRA RAHA OQ ew y4tRAL > RB Ni de shé bu: shi xin de. ah 8 ° Your cell phone is not new.  bai kafei bu  wo yao  de. ' This cup of coffee is not hot. I O FFRA: RAR AB Fangzi hén gui, w6 bu mai da de. want a hot one. Houses are expensive. I won’t buy a large one. 73————e RP XR 1 ap Questions: O BF RERMHB? O Fm HRA BH? Fangzi, ni xihuan xin de ma? Sh6uji, ta mai bu mai jit de? House, do you like a new one? Cell phone, will he buy an old one? O wk > BAH ? Kafei, ni yao  de ma? Coffee, do you want a cup of hot ES Bi Cheer) Complete the answers. QO A?! BHAA AAR MBMR—H ? RE’ : EAARAM FRB RE FUR? “WHA AR FREE BARREL RMA ? RR ee > AMARA 35 WSK > 6) 25 WHR > MBA MBH ? “RE > AMR > AVR Eo ERM — 1B ? REM ss ° nmr nrwnrwn pw IV. & tai: J le overly Function: X& fdi-:- Tf le indicates “too” or “overly”, a negative observation given by the speaker. 0 KE Tt ° Tai guile. (Too expensive.) 74LESSON ¢ 4° HPI-# SRE? Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? @ KAT © Midale. (Too big.) 86 KB T ° Tai  le. (Too hot.) Usage: 1. “XK tai + Vs” means that a noun is “too” or “overly” (adj.). This pattern can also be used as a predicate, e.g., #8 X + #& A We Na zhi shduji tai gui. ‘That cell phone is too expensive’. 2.“K tai+ Vs+ JT” is more subjective, indicating that the speaker feels that what is being talked about is excessively (adj.). For example, #6 X-+#&A BT ° Na zhi shOuji tai gui le. ‘That cell phone is way too expensive’. 8 Exercise Complete the answers below using “-:: f ” with the following words. ia aie aT ( BLK. Ap _ ~ O A: RAH EBA RAE FR? B: ° O A: KEK LALFS ? Bi ABR > ° O A: At EEA HH FAR? Bi RFR’ AFH © O A: RMAHEA Rb tos? B: RAAR O A: RBG ojo ye ? B: RARBG e V. f& néng capability Function: The auxiliary verb 4% néng expresses some capability of the subject. O MFRALM> O AMRF REAR AA ° Xin shouji néng shangwang. Na zhi shouji néng zhaoxiang. New cell phones can go online. That cell phone can take photos. 75———* EAP RR 1 Structures: pf Negation: The negation marker # hz; should be placed before, and not after the auxiliary verb. O AH TRAREM » O #OFMA BR ? W6 de shé bu néng shangwang.  de shouji bu néng zhaoxiang? My cell phone cannot access the Whose cell phone cannot take pictures? internet. 0 Questions: The auxiliary verb #§ néng is placed in the A position in the A-not-A pattern. O tea F RAE A HE BB ta ? O BHR LM? Ni de shé néng bu néng Jiti de néng bu néng shangwang? zhaoxiang? Can the old one go online? Can your cell phone take pictures? O WRF RAE EE? Na zhi shouji néng bu néng shangwang? Can that cell phone go online? 4 8 Exercise Look at the pictures and use 4#§ or % 4& to answer the questions. 8 ei > ose ~ @ sn Li AA See AR AS FH He > KHER BE Bae fe Aa 4a ? HUE? ab tee 2 76LESSON ¢ & « #RI—3 3 YR? Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? a os oA Ae HE AR AE EA)? 4% PAE 7B AE BAe, PIR LF ? VI. % dud ...and more Function: % dud is used after numbers to indicate “more than” or “over”. @ =+4A O EERZRFK ér dud ge rén wt wan duo zhi shé 20 some people 50,000 plus cell phone Structures: 1. When % dud is associated with a number greater than 10, % indicates the residual amount. Co 4 Ba POEL more built tel =+ % {al A 24 g (a at —F g R FIR =8aF 3g cs a (1) 2+ B4BA (2) ~FH RFR ér dud ge rén yiqian duo zhi shouji over 20 people (but under 30) over 1,000 cell phones (but under 2,000) 3) 2B $a at (4) BOF swe wiibai dud ge baozi sanwan siqian dud kuai qian over 500 baozi (but under 600) over 34,000 dollars (but under 35,000) 77—————- $RPRR#1 2. When % dud is used with a number, it refers to what is not specified. (1) BRS (4B) (2) —#H (4%) wit kuai du6 (qian) yi kuai dud (qian) more than five dollars (under 6) more than one dollar (under 2) Complete responses as specified. O WRAY FR? -FtRaASRFER (1,200 ~ 1,300 ) O Mica t ? O RFS)? O FF Kise ? O PRFRH SVR? (21,000 ~ 22,000) 78LESSON « 4 « 3 RI—3 5 Bk? Peo a A Ce oe Ce Lg I. Ask and Talk about Prices Goal: Learning to ask and talk about prices. Task: Your classmate purchased something, so s/he knows the price. Ask him/her about the costs of the items below. II. My Cell Phone Goal: Learning to use simple phrases to describe the size and functions of common objects. t Task: Describe your cellphone, e.g., its size and what it can “ oneal III. Ask for Reasons Goal: Learning to ask for reasons. BE f , ti Task: You would like to buy a gift for your friend. Pair st = i Se we up with a classmate to discuss which cell phone is better. Say which cell phone you picked and explain why. Include at least the following grammatical patterns in your discussion: ERE EB BE? Att @? 79——— RP RR 1 IV. Counting from 11 to 110 Task: Fill in the missing numbers to 110. 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 = += +e +9 +B +H Fe FN th =+ shiyi shi’ér — shisan shisi shiwt shilit shiqi shiba shijiti ér 21 25 _ 27 30 | =+- +k =t+t Zt | ér ér ér sanshi — 31 34 38 40 | (et- e+ EA w+ | | sanshiyt sanshisi sanshiba sishi | 41 42 43 46 50 wat— wets ote atx B+ sishiyi sishi’ér — sishisan _ sishilid wushi 51 | 60 (Et+- AF wishiyT liushi 61 64 66 68 70 | Ar ATe ATA AEA ++ liushiyT litshisi litshilid litshiba qishi 7 73 75 77 80 t+— te t+h tt A+ | qishiyT qishisan qishiwt qishiqt bashi 81 82 84 87 90 ANtF-— At= Ate At+4 A+ bashiyi bashi’ér bashisi bashiqr jitishi 91 94 96 99 100 A+ ATE ea Arh -@ jitishiyi jitishisi jitshilid jitshijit, — yibai 101 102 110 -@ -@a -@ _ e- B= aaah | yibai yibai yibai ling yi ling er © yishi 0 (& ling ) > zero 80LESSON ¢ 4° HP - KS YR? Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? Xt Bits of Chinese Culture Around-the-clock Convenience Stores Students who are new to Taiwan can buy their meals without knowing a single word in Chinese. They can do this in any of Taiwan’s 24/7 convenience stores. Many students will probably even miss the convenience of these stores after they have returned to their countries and wish that they could take the stores home with them. Convenience stores are very important to local life | A Fresh coffee sold at convenience stores in Taiwan and offer an impressive range of services. You get full meals, snacks, drinks, stationary supplies, articles for daily use, DVDs, fashion magazines, and newspapers as well as make photocopies, fax documents, withdraw money, pay bills, and even mail letters and packages at convenience stores. What’s more, you can pick up merchandise, books, and tickets that you order online. During holidays, you can place orders for a festive meal or a cake at a convenience store and then pick it up anytime. Mailing packages . Hotdogs and other foods Hot food FRA HEIBIE : St AMIR AIR AS) 81oSKP RR Notes on Pinyin and Pronunciation 1. Pinyin Rules When “zh-” , “ch-” , and “sh-” stand alone, an “i” is added to the end. When “‘-iao” does not ces99 follow a consonant, change the “i” to “y” to form yao ( # ) (see Lesson Three for explanations). When the vowel “u” is followed by other vowels, but is not preceded by a consonant, change the “u’” to “w,” as in “u” + “ei” > wéi (4) . However, when “u + ei” is preceded by a consonant, the “e” is omitted and the spelling becomes “ui,” as in dui (3) and gui (4) . The pronunciation, however, remains “du(e)i.” 2. Tone Mark Rules (Position of the Tone Marks) All tone marks in pinyin are placed above the vowels, as in ba ( &) , ma (48). bd (48), cei 9 1, and mii (4) . Please note that when placing the tone mark above the dot is not necessary, as in yi (— ) . With compound vowels, the placement of tone marks is prioritized as follows: a> e, o>i,u, ii. ae | Idi (R) , zhao CPR) , mei CH) . jué (4) . dou (4B) , xido (+) . Also note that a/e, e/o never appear together. When “i” and “u” appear together, the tone mark is placed above the last appearing vowel, as in dui (41) . nit (4) . Introduction to Chinese Characters Basic Chinese Radicals Radicals are components of Chinese characters, usually on the left , that systematically categorize Chinese characters by their meanings. For example, eating “ *~ ” and drinking “ »% ” require the use of the mouth, thus they fall under the mouth “ 0 ” radical; listening “ 4% ” requires the use of one’s ears, hence naturally belongs to the ear “ #F ” radical. Radicals lend hand to the cognition and memory of Chinese characters, and lead to the understanding of the characters’ fundamental meanings. When 82LESSON ° # ¢ #R—HS SR? Excuse Me. How Much Does That Cost in Total? learners do not know the pronunciation of a certain character, they can use their knowledge of radicals to look up the character. There are 214 radicals in used in modern day dictionaries, below are 35 commonly used ones from words you have already learned thus far. Chinese Radical in a | Pye) eT AY be rén person Res AR n 2. li strength & io z kou mouth of so + ie ti earth ABs de, vy dy xi sunset B > 5p kK 2 da big Rok & e nii female Es F ° zi child B + x cun inch 4 uy _ . ?p ze jin napkin ee st z xin heart 6 R i ge spear KR A re ha household B $4 is shou hand a7 > aR A a ri sun BAS oe A ® yue moon A oN a mu tree BAR ak & shui water i> HR Ke on , hud fire Bay 3h BE u yu jade we ER | a ¥ bai white aya A ak mu eye to & a ee * zhu bamboo & ke n mi silk # a ér ear ae 83———+ RP RRZ1 a6 oH = a yan speech 3a. oH | R 2  shell Ba RE Xu zu foot By | | xz ye 75U walk Ae > Ah & 2 jin metal BE | | FA eg mén door BA. BA FQ u yi rain & BE 7 shi eat AR Self-Assessment Checklist ak Ican ask and talk about prices. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Ican ask for reasons. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% Ican use simple phrases to describe the size and functions of common objects. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% re)BER EY RG AF OC Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious 2. 2 @ 4% Learning Objectives Topic: & # Food and Drink + Learning the names of common foods and describing their taste. + Learning to express likes for and make simple comments about food. + Learning to describe what somebody can/can’t do and how well one does it. + Learning to ask for help.¥2— Dialogue I \ é A  aA me Ce nad Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious 05-1 % = Minghua A  aA % = Minghua A  % $RZAMP REE RAY BS Wb ° :  dud rén dou shud Taiwan ydu bu shao yOuming de xidochi. ZAM! +h tM. 8a. 2 oR AB GR AF °S © Shi a. Nitrou mian, xidolongbao, chou doufi... dou hén haochi. UR we BK HE ? Ni zui xihuan chi shén 4) 2m A dbee my te HEH : Nitrou mian. Nidrou haochi, tang yé  16 /B OL AIR vb Zheme haochi, w6 hén xiang chi.LOO) EOnO Mae Ce esa a Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious aA 2: RR - RAL HAN 4G 5 > Rr] —A EO? BBR? Minghua : W6 zhidao yi jia yOuming de nidrou mian dian. Women yigi qu chi, zé A -F: KRHT!  : Tai hao le! a =: MP ARAE ° —R BEB A we wh Minghua : Women mingtian qu. Yiding yao dian da wan de. Woe nerdy Yuemei : Many people say Taiwan has quite a few well-known light repasts. Minghua : That’s right. Beef noodles, xiaolongbao, stinky tofu... are all tasty. Yuemei : What do you like to eat most? Minghua : Beef noodles. The beef tastes good and the soup is nice. Yuemei : That tasty. I would like to have some. Minghua — : I know a place that is well-known for its beef noodles. Let’s go together and have some. What do you say? Yuemei : Wonderful! : Let’s go tomorrow. You really have to order a large bowl. Minghua Leber rlela ae | \ 05-2 Vocabulary 1 +A niurou 2, & (N) beef 2 mian a (N) noodles 3 B zhé SI (Adv) really 4 40, hdochi Ve (Vs) delicious 87o ERP RE 1 5 OR shud & (V) say 6 7h shao ie (Vs-pred) few in number 7 AB zy youming x 2 (Vs) well known, famous 8 oye xiadochi a 4 (N) light repast, snack 9 zui K (Adv) most 10 F&F tang a (N) soup, broth 11 is zheme Si (Adv) so 12 4038 zhidao w 2 (Vst) to know BOR is ™ restaurants shops 14 Je dian 2 (N) shop, store 155 —-# yiding ~ 2 (Adv) really must, definitely 16 dian 2, (V) to order (meals) 17 BE wan x (M) a bowl of Phrases 18 £47 shi a > ¥ That’s right. xiaolongbao, e.g., small 19») ZB & xidolongbao wi? meat and cabbage-filled steamed buns 20 &G/R chou doufa LAS oy, tofu (fermented 21 KT tai hao le xo, 4 Excellent. Great. 88LESSON ¢ 3D ¢ +A 4a HAF Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious # 2% — Dialogue II i 05-3 e A  & Antong A  & Antong A  & Antong A  & Antong # wy > PER ML AB R BM o RAR AFD? Ye A Bb RR ° » Zuotian wanshang na jia canting de cai hén haocht, ké you yidian 1a. > Re 16 RR PRA Hh BGK AT HR ° : W6 yé pa la, sudyi wo xihuan ziji zudfan. AR AR AE BAR? : Ni zuofan zud de zé | > FR AE OAR Eo Hk @ RAR WH? * W6 zuo de bu hao. Ni hui zudfan ma? > @o Hay SHE te Bk AE AEE : Hui. W6 de tiandian yé zuo de bucuo. [RR BRCM TMA RKE? ¢ W6 zui xihuan chi tidndian. Ni ké jido w6 ma? HA ER RBM RR: | : Haode, zhé ge zhoumo, ni dao wo jia lai. > SF PT | teat ae » Hao a!  ni. 89© SKP REL F Text in English Yuemei : The food at the restaurant last night was good, but it was a bit spicy. Antong : I can’t take spicy (food), either. That is why I prefer to cook for myself. Yuemei : How well do you cook? Antong : I don’t cook well. Can you cook? Yuemei : Yes. Imake good desserts, too. Antong : I like eating desserts most. Could you teach me? Yuemei : Sure. Come over to my place this weekend. Antong : Great! Thank you. CSIP Cre lictae el \ 05-4 Vocabulary 1 BER zuotian x 3 (N) yesterday 2 AB canting s 5 (N) restaurant 3 We ké RP (Conj) but, however 4 dR la a (Vs) hot (spicy) 5 6A pa a (Vst) (here) to not like, to fear 6 PRL sudyi & as (Conj) therefore, so 7 Ad Ziji wy (N) self 8 RR zuofan KE (V-sep) to cook 9 4y de a (Ptc) complement marker 10 eo hui x, (Vaux) to be able to, can 11 Hs tiandiain = 2 (N) dessert 12 Ae bucud y XR (Vs) not bad 13 Fu ké 2 (Vaux) could (possibility) 14 & jiao : (Vv) to teach 15 2 dao Es (Prep) to 90LESSON ¢ 3 ¢ +A Ae Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious Phrases 16 A —#b — youyidiain xo a little 17 AF bu hao 2 not well I. 4 —25 youyidian slightly Function: 4 — #5 + State Verb suggests a slightly negative evaluation. >> be ee DO BHT AWH—-BRe O RLFRA-BR Zhe wan niirou mian you yidian 1a. Na zhi shé yé yidian gui. This bowl of beef noodle is a little spicy. That cell phone is a little expensive. O tH EFA-BES e Ta de fangzi you yidian jiu. His house is a little old. Structures: Since this expression suggests negative evaluation, there is no negative form for the pattern. If the Vs has a positive meaning, it can’t be used in this pattern. For example, one can say, 22 32% 4 # —25%°  zhang zhaopian you yidiin jiu."This photo is a little old’. However, you cannot say *#htk+k A — 257% 5 Ta méi you yidian piaoliang. ‘His younger sister is a little beautiful’. at ee _ Complete the evaluations. @ A: ane ema? BiRRGRSER O AKRERRERH BARRE R ERI? 91© ERP RRE 1 O A: FAM EB? Bae TR : O A: WMAFtERR? Biteh TRABA : © A: HFM EOB? Bi ARM II. 92 Complement Marker #7 de Function: The complement marker #4 de follows the verb and introduces the complement, which describes the result or state of the action suggested by the verb. QO HEP XBEAEH Ta xué Zhongwen xué de biicuod. He has learned Chinese quite well. O RW IRAT © Ni zuo de hén hao. You did well. O Lita Rth Ai ROAR ° Wang Bomt zud  cai zud de hén hao. Auntie Wang cooks Vietnamese food very well. 2 & O BEF ARAAIRE °  zhong shé mai de hén hao. This type of cell phone sells well. Structures: When a complement is added to a transitive verb, several structural consequences follow. 1. When its object directly follows the verb, the verb is repeated before ## de and the complement. (1) TRPAR LAF BAF OZ © Ni zuofan zuo de zhé haocht. You cook really well. (2) Faye BAL P BUT ° W6 de laoshi jiao Zhongwen jiao de hén hao. My teacher teaches Chinese well. 2. When the object appears at the front of the sentence, the verb is not repeated. (1) AR > AOHKAE Bdge, © Fan, ta zud de zhé haochi. He cooks really well. (2) PS? MRAP IRAE © Zhongwen, ni shud de hén hao. You speak Chinese well.LESSON ¢ 3 ¢ +A 4a 85°C Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious (3) 3EFHSHEb > HHALATIR SPOS © (4) RFRA ARR  zhong tiandian, ta zud de hén  zhi shduji mai de hén pianyi. haocht. This cell phone is sold cheaply. He makes this kind of dessert very tasty. ff Negation: Negation occurs only within the complement. QO eat Eb WAAR O@ LAAT MRNA Ta zuo tiandiain zud de bu hao. Wang  da wangqiti da de bu hao. He does not make desserts well. Mr. Wang does not play the tennis well. © thet totk 8 AF AF O RHR BREMARE Ta de kafei mai de bi hao. ue, o His coffiee does notsell well. Yuenan cai, zhé ji dian zud de bi haochi. This shop does not cook Vietnamese food well. J Questions: O eR PR BAT EER ? O thi Grist se ? Ta zuofan zuo de zé Ta da lanqit da de hao ma? How (well) does he cook? Does he play basketball well? O PX? MIRAE ? Zhongwen, ta shud de hao bu hao? Does he speak Chinese well? 4G Exercise Complete the following answers. OQ  2 RR KBR? eA : O tetAHBMead Ss > MLAESTOTA ee? AF ° ARK > URAL E AR AE? PRR ML s O BPFRRAEBR? Hie O that RIT HF ? qT o 93———* $RPRRE 1 II. Aquired Skills @ hui Function: @ /yi indicates that these skills are acquired through learning. 94 @ MR) 48 e HER ° Miss Chen can cook. O oP L AAR SE SEK © Tamen xidngdi jié dou hui youydng. All of those siblings know how to swim. O hHTTSHRE ° Ta gé hui ti zuqiu. His older brother knows how to play soccer. Structures: @ jui is an auxiliary verb and can be negated. J Negation: QO 163535 FS BR © Ta de mama bu hui zuofan. His mom can’t cook. O RYRAMDA CHE ER ° W6 de  dou bu hui da bangqiu. None of the members of my family knows how to play baseball. J Questions: O Re BH BE? Ni hui zuo tiandian ma? Do you know how to make desserts? O KeRCRPR? {hui bu hui shud  Do you know how to speak Chinese? QO RISA SMA EE W6 mama bu hui zuo tiandian. My mom does not know how to make desserts. te f PSY LER ? Ta didi hui tt ziqit ma? Does his younger brother know how to play football? VRAD AI SAR AR ? Ni de jié hui bt hui zuofan? Does your elder sister know how to cook?LESSON ¢ De +A 4m B4F-% Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious & @ Exercise _ Complete the z answers. Qo A: ee EH A Me Bi > thi Han @ Uk © O A kFTeAR garish 2 Bi RT MB HLH? © A: AASB MIE? BER ss’? TR RIRBS O A KREURR? ME? B: & MRT UB RH ? O A: \H Li LF? RAPS? MBE? eo Bi Re IV. Destination Marker #'] dao Function: The preposition 2] dao indicates the destination of a movement. OD HH KS] SH Ta zhe ge zhoumo dao Taiwan Iai. He is coming to Taiwan this weekend. O CEA AD SILK > Bl BA te — AC THAK ° Laoshi mingtian dao  lai. Women yao han ta yiqi chi wanfan. The teacher is coming to Taipei tomorrow. We are having dinner with him. O BC+ ABH? AABINTAMMREE ° Xiang chi nitrou mian ma? Mingtian women ké dao na jia dian qu. Would you like to have beef noodles? We can go to that shop tomorrow. O KRTVLARPR? HABMREKE |! W6 ké jido ni Zhongwen, mingtian dao  jia lai ba! I can teach you Chinese. Go ahead and come to my house tomorrow. 95———— $RPRR#1 Structures: # Negation: Negation is always done by placing a negator in front of a preposition, not the main verb. QO EALAVMAA FB SILER © Wang  mingtian bu dao  lai. Mr. Wang is not coming to Taipei tomorrow. O A ROAR AAT © HAGA FB] AB RKBBH Na jia de  cai bu haochi. Tamen bi dao na jia canting qu. That shop’s Vietnamese food doesn’t taste good. They don’t go to that restaurant. O HRLEAEH? FURR? ME? Ta wanshang qu kan dianying, bu dao wo6 jia lai, ni ne? He is going to go to a movie tonight and will not be coming to my house. How about you? FF Questions: #! dao can be used to form A-not-A questions. OD RARE! AB) SIR ? Ni méi dao bt dao Taiwan 1ai? Is your younger sister coming to Taiwan? O LEI ABARRAR ? Tamen dao bt dao wo jia lai? Are they coming to my house? Usage: The destination marker #] dao is a preposition and another verb serves as the main verb in the sentence (e.g., ® /di ‘come’ or & qi ‘go’ ). In Taiwan and Southern China, however, £!] ddo is often used as a verb, like ® Idi or & qi. QO BESRER > KALA -R?  dud jia canting, women yao dao na yi jia? There are so many restaurants. Which one should we go? O iM AARLLS EHR MREB? Tamen mingtian wanshang yao dao Wang laoshi jia. Ni xiang qu ma? They are going to Teacher Wang’s house tomorrow evening. Would you like to go?LESSON ¢ 3 ¢ +A 40H 35°C Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious AEb > yr O KietreElRR ° Huanying ni dao wo jia. Welcome to my home. gs isc Make correct sentences by rearranging the order of the characters (1-3) or complete the sentences by filling in the blanks (4-5). @ B3b M)bsa 2] R ® @ ® ® © F5] R EB FAL @ © AF] BR HAH Bib R ® @ @ @ © 38 AMA AKA BH O FALRETK>? HA 97—————- KP RR1 Pa I. = EIerC)) Classroom Activities =e SII ot PI oD Street Vendor Food Is Good Goal: Learning the names of common foods and how to read them. Task: Compete with classmates to see who can name the most street foods. Find pictures of food you know and bring them to class. Show each picture and say the name of the food it shows. aa G02 & ; son ; A B Cc PSR o> II. Tell Us What You Think Goal: Learning to make simple comments about common objects. Task: Read the following statements, then make comments on the statements using 4K, A or A—#. Ee! A: 9% A MM—BATIBBE © Yi wan nitirou mian yibai bashi kuai qian. A bowl of beef noodles costs NT$180. B: 4-855 ° You yidian gui. A bit expensive. O +b 2—-BATR: > °LESSON ¢ De +A 48 A4>% Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious O what—Bme — O —hw3kt+ Zee > S O —kFMABS> > 8 y > ° me — III. Talent Contest Goal: Learning to describe what someone can/can’t do and how well s/he does it. Task: There is going to be a talent contest at school. Find out what your classmates can do and how well they can do it. Record your findings. Ask questions using phrases that you learned, like #£ 25 > weik> 88 fa > 47 BERS BH LER» the) FE > 47 HR . (Make desserts, swim, take pictures, play basketball, play soccer, make xiaolongbao, play tennis.) UR @ LAR ? e URAE 1 RR > SEY UREA SAR ? RE © JERR ? 2: I @ HR ° 3. LAR > AT EAE ARE IV. Asking for Help Goal: Learning to ask for help. Task: From the survey you completed in Task III, find one item that interests you and ask the person if s/he could teach you how do to it, e.g., RBBR hE & > te WAH A %%H ? (I want to learn how to make xiaolongbao. Can you teach me?) 99+ $A PxRe1 Cw ae tts Pes Queuing up at Food Stands Lines in front of roadside food stands are a familiar scene in Taiwan. Food stalls usually open for business at fixed Limessandpingticed Lines in front of popular roadside food stands locations. As long as the food sold at a stall is fresh, inexpensive, and good, you can be sure there will be a long queue in front of it regardless of the weather. With a little pocket change, you can buy delicious baozi, scallion pancakes, wheel-barrel cakes, or pan-fried dumplings. It is little wonder that there are queues on almost every street comer. Street Vendors in Taiwan Street vendors are very common in Taiwan. They are the product of farmer’s markets and temple festivals of an agricultural society of a time passed. Today, street vendors are seen in scenic sites, residential areas, outskirts of markets, business district surroundings, on arcaded corridors, on the streets, outside examination sites, and during temple festivals. The selections of vendors range from daily goods to food to souvenirs. Since street vendors are very mobile, they sometimes affect traffic, disturb quiet neighborhoods, or scar cityscape. If street vendors could be regulated, they could add to the excitement and beauty of the city. A. Street vendors at scenic sites 100LESSON ¢ 3 ¢ +A48H4F°% Beef Noodles Are Really Delicious | Notes on Pinyin and Pronunciation Pinyin Rules As with “zh-/zhi,” “ch-/chi,” and “sh-/shi,” when “z-,” “c-,” and “‘s-” stand alone, “i” is added to form zi, ci, and si. When “u” is followed by other vowels, but is not preceded by a consonant, change the “u” to “w,” as in “u” + “ei” > wéi #& in Lesson Four and “u” + “o” > w6 4 in Lesson 1. When the vowel “i” is followed by “ou” but is not preceded by a consonant, change the “i” to “y” to form %4 ydu (Refer to Lesson 2). When a consonant precedes the “i” + “ou” compound, the “o” is omitted and it becomes “-iu,” e.g., 4 > nit, *% > lid. The “o,” however, is still pronounced, e.g., > “ni(o)v” and “li(o)u.” Introduction to Chinese Characters The Earliest Chinese Characters There are three general beliefs regarding the origin of Chinese characters: 1. Chinese characters were created by a person by the name of Cangjie. 2. Chinese characters originated from the eight trigrams and rope-knotting. 3. Chinese characters originated from pictograms. This is also the most widely adopted belief among scholars. Characters were not created by any single person, at any single time, or at any specific place. They were developed and accumulated over time. Most scholars believe that Chinese characters originated from pictures or drawings and slowly became signs and characters. 101——— SRP XRE1 The Chinese characters we see and use today have undergone many thousands of years of evolution, from the oracle bone script of the Shang Dynasty to bronze script and Large Seal script of the Zhou Dynasty to the Small Seal script that was adopted after the Qin Dynasty and used to unite the Six Kingdoms. These scripts are classified as ancient scripts. During the Han Dynasty, the symmetrical and rounded look of Small Seal script was modified to become more rectangular and orderly, making writing easier and faster. This came to known as Clerical script. The Regular script we use now evolved directly from the Clerical script. In other words, the standardized characters in use today were shaped and formed during the Han Dynasty. FPS BX bE ee Ree Shang Dynasty Zhou Dynasty Qin Dynasty Han Dynasty Han Dynasty (circa 1776-1122 B.C.) (circa 1122-249 B.C.) (circa 221-206 B.C.) [_[eirea 20 200 B.C.) (circa ae (citca'200/8 B.C.) nA Dt TECK RCM Oe CLE I know the names of some common foods and can describe their taste. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can express food preferences and make simple comments about them. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can describe what others can/can’t do and how well they do it. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can ask for help. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 102YUE <KZ BAe AAP Be uy Their School Is Up in the Mountains 2 @ B® Learning Objectives Topic: #425 » 442 Locations and Positions + Learning to describe locations (e.g., near or far). + Learning to talk about place in the vicinity of other places. + Learning to make simple comments about the appearance of a place.Pe AP) eS ee Their School Is Up in the Mountains #4 2— Dialogue I 104 } & 4o x 4o & oF 4o Sw oa & I a > FRB AO ARR FE > Held AR ERE? RAR? > BBR o HOTS Ee YE > bE ? ARRAY LR — LIRA ° > ha) > PARA AH RAL? AWA MLO BAILA > RBAA A ° BTR — AE | > REP]! RAE RA FRM LY OE TG Byeak o AE ? > RAF RAK? BI R-RELR °LESSON * G@ « 4th AP) 2 Re He a Their School Is Up in the Mountains : Tingshuo Yijiin de xué hén piaoliang. : Tamen xué zai nali? Yuan bu yuan? : You yidian yuan. Tamen xué zai Hualian de shanshang. : Shanshang? Nali de fengjing yiding hén méi : Shide, tamen xué qianmian you hai, houmian yé shan, nali zhé shi yi ge hén piaoliang de difang. : Wo xiang qu kankan. Women zhé ge zhoumo yiqi qu ba! : Hao a! WO xianzai yao qu xué ftyin de kafei dian mai  ni ne? : W6 qu louxia zhao péng women yao yiqi qu shangke. 27 X 2 Text in English : [heard Yijun’s school is very beautiful. : Where is her school? Is it far? : It is a bit far. Her school is up in the mountains in Hualien. : Up in the mountains? The scenery there must be very beautiful. : Yes. In front of their school is the ocean and behind it there are mountains. It is really a beautiful place. : Id like to go see. Let’s go together this weekend. : Okay. I am going to go to a  near the school now to buy some coffee. How about you? : Lam going to go downstairs to meet a friend. We are going to go to class together. ro Ree ellie laa \ 06-2 Vocabulary 1 #H/Pq tamen ae (N) they (used for people only) 2 BR xué en (N) school 3 # zai ye (Vst) to be located at 105———* RP XRE1 on a mountain, in the 4 wy) _E shanshang aN (N) mountains 5 ARAL nali by 8 (N) where 6 xR yuan BY (Vs) far 7 = ARAE nali 3. % (N) that place, there 8 el x féng a x (N) scenery, landscape 9 & méi wv (Vs) beautiful 10 ALw qidnmian $k (N) front 11 hai r (N) ocean 12 @@ houmian an (N) back 13 «6b shan e (N) mountain 14 a a zhé 22 (Adv) really, truly 15 dha difang aE (N) place 16 FA xianzai aR (N) now 17) Pa fujin ee (N) vicinity, near 18 fe louxia x a (N) downstairs 19 4X zhao % (V) to meet, to see 20 FAR péng Ry (N) friend 21 LER shang ers (V-sep) to go to class Names ned tam a Phrases 23 F2zR tingshud = & hear that 106LESSON ¢ © « (e(]## # bb Their School Is Up in the Mountains ea 3 = Dialogue II \ 06-3 te BR > RURMPR ° & fe) > tere Ae | te B : RP AreRIL > A-BEA AB 4o ho: MHS 4 AMARA? te B: HERP De SREDRAME x fe) : "CARE 2 SR he RAAB ? te BR? RRASA BSH o & fe) > A MIRABRRE te B+: BRAFM> FHPRABAAE > Se DA KI © 107—————o FAP XR 1 ec Yijun : Huanying nimen 1ai. Antong — : Nimen xué zhé yuan! Yijun : Shi a, bushi hén jin, you yidian bu fangbian. Ruy :  de xué zai nali mai dongxi? Yijun : Zai xué waimian.  limian méi you shangdian. Antong —: Chifan ne?  limian yé méi you canting? Yijun : YOu, canting zai xué su de yi lou. Antong —: Qidnmian zhé dong da hén piaoliang. Yijun :  shi tushiiguan, pangbian de na dong dalou shi jiaoshi, tushiguan houmian you youyongchi. Text in English Yijun : Welcome. Antong : Your school is really far. Yijun : Yes. It’s not close. It’s a little inconvenient. Ruyu : Where do the students here buy things ? Yijun : Outside of the school. There are no shops on campus. Antong : How about eating? Do you have restaurants on campus? Yijun : Yes. The restaurants are located on the first floor of the student dorm. Antong : That building in front of us is pretty. Yijun : This is the library. The building next to it are the classrooms. Behind the library, there is a swimming pool. CeCe aa 8 \ 06-4 Vocabulary 1 cam jin 4 (Vs) near 2 AME fangbian a (Vs) convenient 3 3B H2 zheli a (N) here, this place 108LESSON « 6 ¢ ft (r] 48 4h b Their School Is Up in the Mountains 4 ae xué u ; (N) student 5 AE. zai BR (Prep) at 6 4 wq dongxi x co (N) things, stuff 7 gh waimian AR (N) outside 8 Af limian ao (N) inside 9 Js shangdian a 2 (N) store, shop 10 0%, BR chifan 45 (V-sep) to have a meal 11 eS su ou ES (N) dormitory 12 # lou 2 (N) a storey, a floor 13 tk dong Ra Renae word for 14. KE dalou Ne (N) a multi-storey building 15 = iB tushiguan a (N) library 16 eis pangbian x3 (N) (by the) side, next to 17 KE jidoshi 4 7 (N) classroom 18 Bk youydngchi ye ae (N) swimming pool SO Merete \ I. Locative Marker # zai / 4 Function: 4 zai introduces the location of someone or something. RMB a & 04 — 1& © 109——* RP RR 1 Structures: The primary structure is Noun + # + Location. There are three types of location as shown below: 1. 2. 3. 110 Type A: $e st ob og B3b > ERS ay ot BRO By ie Type B: top F down ay «front 4 4% back #Z inside yb outside & x next to Ft 3 nearby Type C: (49) Noun | Se BE BR A be Pet 0 (1) He Ara FRR HE Bb (2) REE PEAR ° (1) #2 4£ 9b fh ° (22) REBAE BD? (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) RAL SIZ De AB RNS FEMUR RI UL ? oyo ese 15 Ze ig By HE > AA 5 kwh eS 6 KR > REM De te Fo WA AR AE) S AF 1K a) who4 JELESSON « © ¢ #0 (7) 4% #2 hb Their School Is Up in the Mountains Rte FTHeo Usage: 1. When the noun after 7 zdi is a common noun, a locative word has to be added after the common noun to turn it into a place name. For example, in order to express “He is in the house”, you cannot say *# 7% Ta zai fangzi; rather, you need to say th 4 % + #2 mm ° Ta zai fangzi limian. (% + # ® is Type C with the 4 omitted.) 2. When the noun after # zai is a proper name, a locative word is not allowed or necessary. For example, in order to express “He is in Taiwan.”, one says 4 7E i © Ta zai Taiwan, but not **e 7 234m © Ta zai Taiwan limian. On the other hand, in order to express “He is in school”, one can say either #2 7: 7% © Ta zai xué or 1 4 #4 H ° Ta zai xué limian. The addition of the locative word (#2 & /imian, in this case) makes the location more explicit. 3. The locative word # @ limian is a special case. Sometimes, it can be omitted. For example, # # | % 424 & © Ta zai tishiiguan kanshi means “He’s reading in the library”. There is no #2 & /imian in the sentence, but the sentence still means inside the library. However, when the intended meaning is not “inside”, then a locative word is required. For example, in order to express “He is reading outside the library”, one has to say #h # 8] & #8 9+ th A Fe Ta zai tishiiguan waimian kanshu. 4. Notice that the reference point is placed first and the locative word is placed after it. For example, % + 44 Al @ fdngzi de gidnmian “in front of the house” is different from #7 & 4) % + gidnmidn de fangzi “the house in front”. (The former is Type C, but the latter is modifier + noun.) 111——— #RPrReA1 CARRE) FE RE 89 hod myo e Te a Pet SEL ? 5. Abbreviations of locative phrases without 4 are common. For example, “downstairs” is #EF louxid, not *#4) F i du de xidmian; “on the floor” is #4_E dishang, not * #449 _- & di de shangmian. 6. When the #4 is omitted, the suffix & midn in 7 ® limidn, 9} waimian, ® shangmian, etc, can be omitted. For example, ¥ + 4 #2 & fangzi de limian “inside the house” is often just % + # fdngzi li and ##-F _L ®  shangmian “on the cup” is shortened to #4-+ L  shang. a &B Exercise 1. Use the following expressions to describe the four pictures below. A BE owes Ke | BER BRI Al 4 mn gh Ri Mt 3H ee (a9) 112LESSON ¢ 6 « (84222 4.b £ Their School Is Up in the Mountains ES aes => Cl ced ky) 2. #4242, ? Where is he? Give answers based on the pictures. 113—————- $A PRR 1 Combine the clauses. O Hew E > AB Roos 1G AEH AA (Yangming Mountain ) wy _E . > HARA ib bay (ABR) wks e O HHS MAR SRMALRMiU © > ° © Hse MPIRABE > MRABAS KER © > ° O RRMA KA RWIS > ABRs TE ARAB (44) BEE > ° X. of II. Existential Sentences with % yé Function: The existential verb #4 ydu expresses the existence of somebody or something at some location. @ MRAZ (4H) AMARS A> O RAMA SH ° O LLEAHRRA ZAM we - O HTA-RAE Structures: The existential structure is: Location + 4 + Noun. The internal structures of location here are the same as the location introduced above in the locative sentences. aS Negation: The negation for existential sentences is 1&4 méi you. O HAMEL ARA MAI ¢ O AZHGRAFE ® O MRAM RDRA RR © 114Their School Is Up in the Mountains LESSON « © « (th) 3% # bb J Questions: O RRMILA HH? O ZK (4) BHARAH CHFEABE ? Usage: 1. The object in existential sentences is usually indefinite, i.e., the identification E F >) Rearrange the order of the following characters to form acceptable sentences. O A RZ BRHRF LE O EF we % A O £20 BA HER Hike CO KE mh HRMABA F of the object is not readily certain or familiar to the speaker. Note also that existential sentences and locative sentences are just the reverse in sequence, ¢.g., HF A Bl S48 vs. Bl EMAL FE ° Louxia you tushiiguan. vs. Tushiguan zai ]ouxia. “Downstairs there is a library.” vs. “The library is downstairs.” . In A — X FH WO you yi zhi shduji “I have a cellphone”, the verb 4 is possessive and transitive and in ¥ + #2 & # — X F 7% Fangzi limian you yi zhi shOuji “There is a cellphone in the house”, the verb 4 is existential and intransitive. The possessive 4 is always transitive, while the existential 4 is always intransitive. ® © ® > o © © ®@ > ? OG § @ ®@ @ > o OG @ ®@ ® © > ° 115———« $7 xXR#1 Ill. 116 Softened Action V (— ) V , Function: Verb reduplication suggests “reduced quantity”. It also suggests that the action is easy to accomplish. When what is expressed is a request/command, verb reduplication softens the tone of the statement and the hearer finds the request/ command more moderate. MO EBIRR ER RBKG (—-) Ae REAP RL GHAR? A: RAIS KK EAE MATAR ? B: RM (-) Be At PRIA RBH EE ? B: AREAS > BH. LEM HESITATE ° o 000 Structures: - Questions: There are two ways to form verb reduplication in interrogatives. 1. Tag question: (1) RR > KER? (2) aH RRBR > Tr ? 2. With an auxiliary verb: (1) BLAS DARA? MRR LARAA SE ? (2) RA SMHS > MTR TURK R ? Usage: 1. Not every verb can be reduplicated. Mainly action verbs can go undergo verb repetition. Of the verbs we’ve learned so far, the verbs that can be reduplicated include & kan, "% chi, hé #8 xiang, #& zud, +1 dd, 4% zhao, B mdi, # jido, and 4 bang. 2. Verb reduplication is mostly used in speech for requests and suggestions. Most reduplicated verbs are monosyllabic. When the verb takes an object, only the verb gets reduplicated, not the object. For example, L 49 shangwdng ‘go online’ is changed to L | 44] shangshang wang; #{#& zudfan ‘cook’ is changed to ARK ER zudzudfan.LESSON ¢ © « fr] 24% 4 uh £ | #&B Exercise 1. Reduplicate the following verbs. QO th > hi @ 8k > oO ~He 5 @ HaR SO O BRR > _ CO Bx > @ 48% >_ ssi — sO SBR OO erie 2. Fill in the blanks with correctly reduplicated verbs plus any object needed. ( ME eB met RS RM) O PMMEVREA ABA O ARGH BAR O© ARERR CC? O BARAK} HD @O A: BAXFMRA? RRA? B: IV. % & bushi Negation Function: % & bushi is not a regular negator. It negates what has been stated or assumed, i.e., “it is not true that...,” for example, QO ALREREFARE REARARE ° O HARB AGA + A Aw > ALEb) oEAY © © ABRAAZASRED: RRASROR ? 117————* ARP RE 1 ) Please use the phrase % 5 to complete the following conversation. 118 Structures: The # 2 bushi negation can occur in either positive or negative sentences, e.g., OD eA RAR FQ owt o EEF RS © O RFRAR> RIBKRK? O RERAFERLFENM? THERON BWART ° Usage: We have already covered # bi negation and 7% méi negation. # x bushi negation is quite different. It negates what has been said or claimed, “It is not the case that...”. RBA AF evs. HRRRAAF MRA GE O AS RAM REL? HH? > fe RAE WIE © PRAPT GE AFIS RE OY SH BG GOTH? > BARRE RES TR REG : ARS ABR AE AR FAR SE © > RMAL > RIES WAT IR AF > RAAB AAS > MRA EAB BH ? > RAR RHA > PUR APR ARS © irae, | AR A He RAB Hew ? > Kw Lb BF0 zs RT AR © ° Dr nrnrn pyLESSON © © © 4h (rh) 248 4h E f 5 Ee aE V. Location of an Activity / €ihee Function: 4 zai ‘at’ and 2'] dao ‘go to’, are often used to introduce the location where an activity takes place. @O KREGARUMR ° O thfothAA AB tO E bw © AIS bi HB) FR UL OY OE IE 9B ood o O AKMREKERRARB C+ Mo Structures: The location usually follows one of the these words: 72 zai ‘at’, =] dao “go to’. The action expression follows the location phrase. ff Negation: The negation marker # bu is placed before 4 zai / #!| dao, rather than before the verb. QO UTIFRA ER THR © O HRA KABSES ° © RSFAFAES RE DWE EE Boop o 4 JF Questions: O rire iT EIR? O REE RAE Bass ? Usage: 1. Note the word order. The location comes before the main verb. That is, the “ Zt zai/ # dao + PLACE” phrase appears before the verb phrase as do all prepositional phrases. You do not say * th 'P sc 7 RK Ta xué Zhongwen zai jia; rather you say tu 7: R$ P 3X © Ta zai jia xué Zhongwen. ‘He studies Chinese at home’. 2. The negation is placed before the preposition rather than the main verb, e.g., #4 A 4 RK EAA © Ta bu zai jia shangwang. ‘He doesn’t use the internet at home.’ 119———* ERP RRE 1 Tell stories based on the pictures below. 4a de HERR RE. WAR ° Grammar Examples in Pinyin and English ° I. Locative Marker £# zai Function: Function: Wo zai Taiwan. Iam in Taiwan. Tamen xué zai Hualian. Their school is in Hualien. Canting zai  de yi lou. The restaurant is on the first floor of the dormitory. Structures: Structures: 1. Type A: 1. TypeA: (1) W6men xué zai  (1) Our school is in Taipei. (2) W6 baba zaoshang zai xué (2) My dad is at school in the mornings. 2. TypeB: 2. TypeB: (1) Ta zai waimian. (1) He is outside. (2) Tashiiguan zai houmian. (2) The library is in the back. 3. TypeC: 3. TypeC: (1)  zai  Timian. ; (1) Iam in the dormintory. (2) Na jia dian zai ni jia fjin ma? (2) Is that store near your house? (3)  dian zai  de pangbian, bu (3) The coffee shop is next to the dorm, zai limian. not inside. (4)  zai tishiguan de (4) The swimming pool is behind the houmian, bu zai qianmian. library, not in front. (5) Ta han péng zai tushiiguan (5) He and his friend are at the coffee houmian de kafeidian. shop behind the library. 120Their School Is Up in the Mountains II. Existential Sentences with 4 yé Function:. @ Na dong da (de) gidnmian ydu hén dus rén © Wo jia fajin yu tashiguan. © Shanshang you lidng jia hén ySuming de  dian. © Louxia you yi jia shangdian. Structures: J Negation: @ 14 jia fajin méi you youydngcehi. @ Jiaoshi limian méi you xué © Na dong dalou de houmian méi you canting. _# Questions: Ni jia fijin you hai ma? J yin yi @  (de) houmian you méi you hdochi de nitrou mian dian? III. Softened Action V (— ) V Function: @ Tamen xué hén piaoliang, wo xiang qu kan (yi) kan. chifan? B: Wo6 xiang (yi) xiang. A: Ni zhoumo zuo shén B: Zai jia kankan shi, he kafei, shangshangwang, yé qu xué dada langit. 98 © A: Women jintiin wanshang qi nali ° LESSON ¢ 6 « 48/7442 4b Function:. @ There are many people in front of that building. © There is a library near my home. © There are two famous coffee shops on the mountain. © There is a shop downstairs. Structures: JF Negation: @ There is no swimming pool near his home. © There is no student in the classroom. © There is no restaurant behind that building. J Questions: @ Is there ocean near your house? @ Is there a good beef noodle shop behind the school? Function: @ Their school is pretty. I’d like to take a look. I'd like to study Chinese. Please teach me. A: Where are we going to go for dinner tonight? B: Let me think. A: What do you do on weekends? B: I stay home and do some reading, have some coffee, and do some surfing on the internet. I also go to school and play some basketball. o oO 121—————* €R PXR21 Structures: J Questions: 1. Tag question: (1) Qing bangbang  hao bu hao? (2) Qing ni jiaojiao w6, ké ma? 2. With an auxiliary verb: (1) Xianzai waimian hén re, ni yao bu yao zai jia kankan shi? (2) Wo bu hui zuo tiandian, ni ké bu ké Jidojiao w6? IV. #5 bushi Negation Function: @  jué na zhi shduji hén gui. Wo jué bushi hén gui. © 14 bishi dian da wan de nitrou mian. Ta dian xiao wan de. © Canting bushi zai xué limian. Canting zai xué waimian. Structures: @ Tamen bishi zai louxia hé kafei. Tamen zai louxia mai shi. © W6 bishi bi lai, wd zhoumo lai. 8 W6 bushi bu xihuan chi niurou mian, ké zhé jia de nitrou mian tai la le. Usage: Ta bi yao mai baozi vs. Ta bushi yao mai baozi, ta yao mai choudoufi. 122 Structures: _# Questions: 1 Tag question: (1) Please help me, OK? (2) Please teach me, OK? 2. With an auxiliary verb: (1) It is hot outside now. Would you like to do some reading at home? (2) I don’t know how to make desserts. Could you teach me? Function: @ Minghua feels that cell phone is expensive. I think it’s not all that expensive. © He didn’t order a large bowl of beef noodles. He ordered a small one. © The restaurant isn’t on campus. The restaurant is off campus. Structures: @ It's not the case that they are drinking coffee downstairs. They are buying books downstairs. © [am not not coming. I am coming on the weekend. 8 It’snot that I don’t like beef noodles; rather, it’s that this shop’s beef noodles are too spicy. Usage: He isn’t buying baozi. vs. It’s not that he’s buying baozi. He’s buying stinky tofu.V. Location of an Activity Function: WoO baba zai jia zuofan. Ta han ta péng dao qi lou de jiaoshi shangwang. Women laoshi chang dao xué fijin de  dian hé kafei. Women hén xihuan zai zhe jia canting cht niurou mian. © © 00 Structures: J Negation: @ Tamen jintidn bi zai jid chi wanfan. © Ti xianzai bi zai  kanshi. ©  dud xué bi zai xué limian de kafei dian mai  4 Questions: @ Nimen zai nali da langia? © Ni méi dao zhé jia shangdian mai tiandian ma? LESSON ¢ © « #h4P] 424% 41h £ Their School Is Up in the Mountains Function: © o OO My dad is cooking at home. He and his friends went to the classroom on the seventh floor to use the internet. Our teacher often goes to a coffee shop near to the school to drink coffee. We love to eat beef noodles in this restaurant. Structures: J Negation: @ They aren’t eating dinner at home today. © He is not studying in the dormitory now. © Many students do not buy coffee at the coffee shop in the school. fF Questions: @ Where do you play basketball? © Does your sister come to this shop to buy desserts? 123——- ERP RR#Z1 I. Where Are They? Goal: Learning to describe someone’s location. Task 1: Look at the picture below, and write down where each person is. Task 2: Write your name anywhere on the picture, then take a look at the picture of the person next to you and tell the class where s/he is. Listen to all the students and write down where everyone is. Have your teacher check to see if you are correct. 124 124LESSON ¢ O ¢ fh (7) 23 dub b Their School Is Up in the Mountains BBA (a8 ) (HE 2B) qo FF AF aA ay VDg DODD II. Tell Us about the Place You Live Goal: Learning to make simple comments about the location and the appearance of a place. Task: You would like to invite a classmate to your house (you live near the school). Tell him where your house is, what is nearby, what you can do at home or in the neighborhood, and what you can eat nearby. 5 A of Sees te | pear) Soe | j ER RAMA ? 125————- KP XR#1 Ve ERA 2 RAH? ME. BR ER KR URN EA AEH BERD B) & 48 > om oF Je > > ihe WBA RIL 76 $5 > oB opoase WATE ? At RR AE RE "46 ER + | BAT BE ? HR ERG III. I Want to Know About Your School Goal: Learning to talk about your school in your country. Task: Pair up with a partner and ask about his/her school. You can use the following questions to help you obtain information. When you are done, report your findings to the class. (List your answers.) 126LESSON ¢ © © fb (P28 4% hb £ Their School Is Up in the Mountains O BOER AHE? (KE. BE wk RR. DS ee Wei » BE a S ) O RHAFRAE EB? ARA ? PRIME ? O RHF RMA? (b> ie. BE. AB) O RFA RMT 2? (Bye TR. KR ORR G Hh Lb. &ae) 127—————+ $APRRA1 128 | eee ts - Chinese Culture Taboos with the Number “7” si and Lucky Numbers “>” lit and “A” ba Why is the number 4 si shunned by Taiwanese? And why do they especially like the numbers 6 lit and 8 ba? This has everything to do with the Chinese culture of homophones. Since the number 4 si sounds almost the same as the word “3&” si “death,” it is disliked by most Chinese. That is also the reason why some hospitals do not have a fourth floor, and some people avoid buying houses with a number 4 si in the mailing address. Therefore, if a house were located on the “4th Floor, No. 4, Zhongshan Road, Section 4,” this house is very likely to be cheaper than the surrounding houses. On the other hand, since the number 6 /iz: sounds like the word “# /i?’, meaning the salary of a government official (in ancient China), and the number 8 ba sounds like the word “%£ fa’, meaning “to strike it rich”, they are popular with the Chinese. mere SES 4, Some hospitals in Taiwan don’t have 4th floors “. People and businesses like certain lucky numbers PRA : AALESSON ¢ 6 « (8244 bb Their School Is Up in the Mountains Birth Rate vs. Private Schools Running a school is difficult, be it 30;— private or public, but this is especially 25 so for private schools. As low birth rate exacerbates, keeping the school in operation is becoming an even harder mission. As more and more people 15 choose to refrain from parenthood, fewer and fewer children are being born each year. According to statistics 5 from the Ministry of Interior, there were 305,000 new borns in 2000. This 9 . 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2014 numbenidroppedMogl OZ O00inEZ O10: Birth rate chart for the last 30 years though with a slight comeback in 2012 BSR : ABBE Ra at 229,000 new borns. Fewer children mean fewer students enrolled in schools. Many departments and schools are being confronted with the problem of shutting down or merging with other schools; and this phenomenon is mostly seen in private schools. Students in private schools (HGR) ERE BMF tw Introduction to Chinese Characters The Six Categories of Chinese Characters Chinese characters can be divided into six categories known as the Six Writings “A” /iusha. 1. Pictograms ( 44%) : Characters in this category are idealized shapes of objects. Examples include sun“ ,” moon “Fj ,” mountain “wy ,” river “)!| ,” water “2k .” fire “OK ,” cow “4F ,” sheep “# ,” child “+.” » 129————— FKP RR 1 130 Ideograms (45 # ) : Ideograms are characters that use markers to indicate abstract thoughts. Examples include above “_E ,” center “ ,” below “F ,” root “# ,” end “# ,” sky “A ,” and blade edge “77 .” Compound ideographs ( @ %& ) : These characters use a combination of two or more characters to form a new character with a new meaning. Examples include bright “4” (from sun “8” and moon “”) , cut down “4%” (person “A” + spear “*%”) , imprison “Al” (enclose “O” +person “A”) , trust “{Z” (person “A” + speech “%”) , rest “#k” (person “A” + tree “#”) , look “4” (hand “#”+eye“B”) . Phono-semantic compounds (4% #¢) : These characters are made up of a phonetic component and a semantic component. Examples include sunny “8” (the phonetic of blue “#” + the semantic of sun“ 9” ) , clear “##” (the phonetic of blue “#” + the semantic of water “7k ,” which came to mean “clear water.” ) Derivative cognates ( #3) : This category consists primarily of character pairs of different shapes with the same meaning or similar meanings derived in diffierent places and at different times. For example, the characters “4+” and “4” both mean “old age.” Phonetic loans ( #%{#) : Some concepts originally could be said but did not have any characters to represent them, so characters with the same or similar pronunciation were borrowed. For example, the character “®% ,” which originally meant birds resting on a tree, was borrowed to “« » mean west. oe aS D Self-Assessment Checklist I can describe a location (e.g., near or far) or position. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can talk about a place closely around one’s work and life. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can make simple comments about the appearance of a place. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%Be OR FE ASbE KTV Going to KTV at 9 O’clock in the Morning & 4 @ #® Learning Objectives Topic: 9} fj (aFeb » fe) Time (Time-When and Time-Duration) + Learning to tell and ask about time. + Learning to describe an activity that takes place at a point in time (time-when) or during a certain frame (time-duration). + Learning to make appointments with friends. + Learning to talk about habitual activities.Ce a oy Op A ae OS a Going to KTV at 9 O’clock in the Morning 132 mw YY aL t a m ym HH DH * * > ETT | BR > AK? PBL ME? > KEKIV "Re RAPA AABA+PREAR KTV Aw® e > FEASSH KIV ? At EB ? > He RE REE) P+ OBE REA RAR-HRE? > RRMA? TRRAARIT Fre! > SET > FRR-LBR? RBBRBK? > RRR BT > A RHE RE — AOR? [BRRA E> MIE? > RAE BRMECBE ABR?LESSON * 7 * EHS KTV Going to KTV at 9 O'clock in the Morning F >< a £ MK camie ating Antong  Antong  Antong  Antong  Antong  :  ni yao qu nali? jianmian. : Zaoshang jitdian qu KTV?  : Cong zaoshang qidian dao zhongwii shi’érdian, zui pianyi. Yao bt yao yiqi qu? : W6 xiang qu, ké w6 dé qu yinhang. Xia ci ba! : Hao a, xia ci ni yiding yao lai. W6 xiang ting ni  :  wenti. Duile, shén shihou you kong yigi chifan? : Houtian wo you kong, ni ne? : Wo yé you kong, houtian wanshang qidian zé : Hao a! Zaijian. Se ee Osborn Antong Yuemei Antong Yuemei Antong Yuemei Antong Yuemei Antong Yuemei : Yuemei, where are you going? : To KTV to sing. My friends and I are meeting at Da-an KTV at 9:20. : Going to KTV at 9:00 in the morning? Why? : Because from 7:00 in the morning to 12 noon, it is the least expensive. Do you want to go along? : I would love to, but I have to go to the bank. Maybe next time. : Okay. Next time, you have to come. I would like to hear you sing. : No problem. By the way, when do you have time to eat with me? : I’m free the day after tomorrow. Yourself? : I’m also free. How about the day after tomorrow at 7:00 in the evening? : Great. See you. 133© SRP RRE IL en srs ss nsdn os Seance nem Ce cPem ince laa \ 07-2 Vocabulary 1 BE dian Z (M) : ee oo 2 KTV (N) Karaoke 3 08 ak  ce (V-sep) to sing 4 ae fen = (M) minute 5 B® jianmian Aa (V-sep) meet 6 Be cong x (Prep) from 7 wp + zhongwt x x (N) noon 8 aE dé 2, (Vaux) to have to, must 9 BRAT yinhang yy (N) bank 10 FAK shihou wee (N) when 11 4 RK houtian RB 5 (N) the day after tomorrow Names Da-an (name of a KTV named 12 KE Da’an 25 after a district in Taipei, where Shida is also located) Phrases 13 Fee xia ci as * next time 14 7% Fe] RB méi wén Ux e, No problem. 15 #7 duile ae by the way 16 AE you kong yA to have free time 17 a zaijian BR a Goodbye. 134LESSON * 7 ¢ 7 EEE KTV Goingto KTV at 9 O'clock inthe Morning # 2% =— Dialogue II \ 07-3 a sD 34 & @) : woh eZ ? go Ei R CFR F-FRER* RE? ee @) : RAP Re MT > FOES RA ER tL oo HRB AH ? 4o Eo: BPs LR EER x f) > ABb-F o dpe b AS ? 4o Eo: MRURI > HAM LABELER © x fe) : AE BR? 4a EZ : MRSS > FRR > TERRA BE e Ft RAETRLBAS? 4o Eo: RAPRIRI4 GA o 135————— ERP RR 1 eats e athyt Antong — : Raya, ni zai chifan a? Raya : Shi, chi wtican, dé yixia yao shangke. Ni ne? Antong : W6 gang xi Duile, xiawi sidianban xué ydu lanqit bisai. Ni xiang qu kan ma? Ray : Xiang a. Bisai jidian jié Antong — : Litdianban. Ni wanshang you shi ma? Ray : W6 zuijin hén mang, méi tian wanshang dou shang shifa ke. Antong =:  de zé Ruyt : Gang kaishi xué zi xié de bt hao, ké w6 jué hén you yisi.  : W6 youkong ké qu kankan ma? Ruyt : W6 dé wén ldoshi. reece Antong — : (I see) you’re eating , Ruyu? Ruyu : Yeah, I’m eating lunch. I have class in a bit. How about you? Antong —: I just got out of class. By the way, there is a basketball game at school at 4:30 this afternoon. Would you like to go watch? Ruyu : Yes, what time does the game end? Antong : 6:30. Do you have something to do this evening? Ruyu : [have been busy lately. I go to calligraphy class every evening. Antong : How is that (the studying) going? Ruyu : Ijust started studying. I’m not writing characters well, but I think it is interesting. Antong : CanI go check it out sometime when I have free time? Ruyu : IT have to ask the instructor. 136LESSON * Ze PEASE KTV Going to KTV at 9 O'clock in the Morning CeCe rc liciwael 07-4 Vocabulary progressive aspect verb; 1 HE zai Re (Vs) in the process of doing something 2 + witican x2 (N) lunch 3 FN] gang 4 (Ady) just now 4 Fz xi oe (V-sep) to finish class 5 FF xiawt a x (N) afternoon 6 + ban R (N) half 7 th bisai aN (N) game, competition 8 eR jié ah (Vp) to finish 9 ROUT zuijin K 4 (N) recently, lately 10 «te mang wv (Vs) busy 11 Ee méi w (Det) every, each 12 KR tian : (M) Measure word for day 13 2 shifa can (N) calligraphy 14 Z ke A (N) class 15 BAS kaishi ead (Vp) to begin, to start 16 Zi Py (N) character 17 f xié ae (V) to write 18 FL ké Be (Vaux) may (permission) 19 fe] wen a (V) to ask Phrases 20 SF dé yixia By Ze later 21 A S you shi ye R to be busy, to be engaged 22 A & my you yisi wo to be interesting, to be fun 137oERP REI ExIcImTma\ I. Time and Place of Events Function: The time and place of events are often specified in sentences using the sequence Time + Place + Event. The subject of the sentence occurs either in front of or after Time. QO hi hLHARFFERE EEK O KRAMER RAM 9 wb EH Hog © O AMBAAALH SBA SE O MARZ E+—BMRRR C+ AM Structures: J Negation: The negative marker # bw appears before place elements. DO RKREF ERC ° O Foe TRU MBA RARER ° O eM BRAKL LEAR? A Questions: O RFFEFZRS RH ER? O RMRAAR RIN OG BFR? O MAM ELABEE KIV BR? © teri tt BFE BEA ERLE ? O RF trek AARZLZEMEA EH ? Usage: 1. Every event involves a time and a place. While the time and place may not be explicitly stated in the sentence, they are typically evident from the context. If there is no context, the references are ‘right now’ and ‘right here’. 2. Note the word order. Time comes before place. For example, to express ‘I don’t eat dinner at home in the evening’, we say 445% _L #4 RGR © W6 wanshang 138LESSON © 7 * BEAR KTV Going to KTV at 9 O'clock in the Morning bu zai jia chifan or % Lb H&A ERS AR © Wanshang  bi zai jia chifan, but not * 4 RE RS ARH _L WO bei zai jia chifan wanshang. 3. In Taiwan the sequence ‘+ / # + Place + VP’ is interchangeable with “2] + Place +# / + VP’. For example, #1°]8% EL KTV 4k ° WSmen wanshang qu KTV  ‘We go to the KTV for singing in the evening’ is the same as 4% fr} LB] KTV 4°83 4 ° Women wanshang dao KTV qi  The latter, however, is not as common as the former in Taiwan. ey) ee Describe the pictures below by saying either Time or Place or both. (ag, Eb / Ae APT RR a DB / 9% 0%, OR ) > te Fo eA A oe Eb Bb FE APY RK Pe HUEY FE IB TAR © (P+ / BS / bw) > te Fo pe thipe- (FF / EMRE / BFK) > SSPE CPE / BR / t ER) DRG BE 139+. FAPRREI II. 4 cong: dao:: from A toB / EEL Function: This pattern is used to indicate the “from...to...” spatial distance between two places and the “from...to...” temporal duration of an event. In other words, A and B can refer to times or places. O AKFLE+BA+PFF-BIDAP RE O KRFKRKZLEMLAA E> ROU RRE » O KRERAAMARAIWA — BER © O KRURMARI ZILA RK © O HHA SHEP FRBEGMR » Structures: Sp Negation: @ Ray SERA Re BB] + — Bb e O RAZ HABIBI RA REF EBM EAR © © A: KH BE TRAERR? Bi RSRMFLAMEABRAE TRAATMo © Hz ALE MR KTV Fi © O RABRK ERE MIBK > BHRRE © y uestions: Three different patterns can be employed in this construction. p ploy, 140 O RMSE EAK ELS FRR EH? (7H) O AMKE S sl (e178 SK AR? (A-not-A) © HNMR GSBAD See AERLR? (ARB)LESSON ¢ 7 * PEASE KTV Cea Exercise ) Describe the events in the pictures. KER ARAB ALE > BU RAPT AR J Q: KR AME TE BARB ? & A: ° ne ” III. Progressive, On-going Actions # zai } JE Function: % zdi indicates an ongoing activity taking place at the present (default) or at a given time. QO FeMALR- O KA! RALESGK? O HAE FLRERERR ? Structures: ~ Negation: Note that 4 z negation is more common than #. O LFRAAE > HHA ERLE © O RA RAR 4A c Hea) FHA BE BR ta 141+ $APxRe1 J Questions: O RM SH E ? © ese bp Ze ER ? © teirizeit BER ? Usage: Only action verbs can be used with the # zdi structure. State verbs cannot go with 4 zdi. It is not correct to say * = #474 # shOuji zai gui. 4% @ Exercise Bo are oe People 3 in os al OIE RAD 8 é @ 4°: © tata O RR IV. méi each and every ¢ ‘ Function: The Determiner 4 méi indicates each and every. QO EAR A 2 ° CO AA AAR AR ABA FAK I SL BY BF LEK O B-RALBTULM O HRA? BAB SHE » Structures: Sentences with 4 méi almost always include the adverb 48 dou ‘all’ to reinforce the sense of “no exception”. # +M +N + 4f .... See the examples above. J Negation: 1. The negation marker # bi or 7& méi appears after 48 dou but before the verb. (1) AERA te ° (2) FH V5 AE ARAB IR (3) RM E> BARF RBA Eo 142LESSON © Ze FEAR KTV Going to KTV at 9 O’clock in the Morning 2. To indicate ‘it is not the case that...’, 7A 2 bvishi is used before # (and also before #f dou) . (1) HARA RRRMEG ER © (2) PAPA RAAB A SE iLR © (3) Hoa) LP HBLRA eM ASP EB BRT ER JF Questions: O HB ABABA MEH ? O RESRAM ER CRRE ? © HRA > BIRABRIEA GH ? Usage: 4 % méi tian is the same as #— K méi yi tian ‘every (single) day’. — yi ‘one’ is often omitted. Similarly, 4 méi ge is the same as # — 1H méi ge ‘every (single) one’. 8 Exercise Complete the sentences and dialogues below based on the pictures provided. He WO Fe Hath > Hee A: (64/88 akmet EHR? AS (etree Shik HAMESS sh ? B: o B: 8 LL J 143+ AP xRe1 V. TMA ké permission * €Ra LLL Function: J 24 ké indicates permission to perform an action. QD RHR > MATT LAR A RAT EEK » O EER’ KRTYAERFEM? O AYER RTAYR) Ho Structures: J 4 ké is an auxiliary verb and it precedes the verb. JF Negation: Q BSR RATAREREM > O BATALAE SHED CRG © O AA HAR? KATUARPBM e J Questions: OA: RTARTA 1H ERLE ? B: i Bl ze |! OA: KRRLARMAF > TUK? B: FLAT ° OA: BARHEH? RTULAAB? B: HAR > PRRCRHE Usage: 1. In Lesson 3 “4 &# J UA PX ©” Kan dianying ké xué  “Watching movies, (I) can learn Chinese” and in Lesson 5 “4 *J LA 4k HUH ?” Ni ké jiao w6 ma? “Can you teach me?”, “*J 2A” ké is used to inquire if it is possible for someone to do something. In this lesson , however, J LA ké in the question # RET AKAA% ? Wo ydu kong ké qu kankan ma? “Can I go check it out when I have free time?” is used to ask for permission. 2. AF vA can only be used to indicate “permission”, not “possibility”. The negative form can only be used to indicate permission. For example, “(AT LAR Fel AR ©” Ni ba ké shud lAoban bu hao. “You mustn’t say anything bad about the boss.” When you use “J # FLA” or “FJ UUAY LA”, it can indicate either permission or possibility. For example, 144LESSON « 7 # EAS KTV Going to KTV at 9 O’clock in the Morning (1) *R*T AF VABA RK RK ? (possibility) (2) RPUAWY LAR — & HH 4K ? (permission) 3. When answering a question, “*J 24” alone suffices. A: 38th > RTARTA RSRER? Bi: Tue ew Please complete the following dialogues using 7 » O A: Helps] LA oh ae ? a [RSA ROR? aoe | > oH Fe] Bea] eT ART LA ES BST ER ? RUTMA/TRTU/ TAB? . 3° Dr wWDPrP DP DP w DRED TAME : O A:RMBARMN ER RAB? > PSB RAE OA: AN KK ER HERGG? OT RDHKETY YQ S 145+ FAPRREI1 I. Time and Place of Events Function: @ Ta han ta péng xiawii zai jidoshi xié shufa. W6 zudtian wanshang dao wo jia fujin de  dian hé  Women zhé ge zhoumo qu tishiguan kanshi. Nimen mingtian zaoshang shiytdian dao wo6 jia lai cht nivrou mian. oo 0 Structures: #- Negation: @ W6 wanshang bi zai jia chifan. © Ta han ta gé zuijin dou bi lai xué shangke. © Tamen zhé ge zhumo bi qu shanshang kan féng J Questions: @ Ni xiawi yao bu yao lai xué di langit? © Nimen xianzai zai w6 jia fijin de shangdian mai sh6uji ma? 6 Ni péng wanshang jidian qu KTV  © Tamen shén shihou dao Hualian kan lanqit bisai? © Ni han ni méi mingtian zdoshang yao qu nali kan dianying? II. 4 céng dao’: from A to B Function: @  cong zaoshang shidian ér dao xiawit yidian shi you Zhongwen ke. 146 (Op ebienii tty epee eee in Pinyin and English ° Function: @ Heandhis friends practice calligraphy in the afternoons in the classroom. Last night, I went to a coffee shop near my house to have some coffee. We will go to the library this weekend to study. You guys come to my house to have beef noodles at 11:00 tomorrow morning. o 0 © Structures: JF Negation: @ I don’t eat dinner at home in the evenings. © He and his brother haven’t come to school for classes lately. © They are not going up the mountain to view the scenery this weekend. ‘ Z Questions: @ Would you like to come to school to play basketball in the afternoon? © Are you buying a cell phone in the shop near my house right now? © Whattime do your friends go to KTV to sing in the evening? © When are they going to Hualien to watch the basketball game? © Where are you and your sister going to go see the movie tomorrow morning? Function: @ [have Chinese class from 10:20am to 1:10pm.LESSON ¢ Ze REASEE KTV Going to KTV at 9 O'clock in the Morning © Wo jintian cong zdoshang dao wanshang © [am free from morning to night today. dou you kong, huanying nimen lai w6 jia. (You’re) welcome to come to my house. © Cong wo jid dao na ge youyongchi you © From my house to that swimming pool is a yidian yuan. little far. © W5 cong  péng jid dao zhé ge @ [came to this place from my friend’s difang lai. house. © TA cong tishiiguan dao na jia canting qu © He went from the library to that restaurant chifan. to eat. Structures: Structures: J Negation: : J Negation: @ Women de shiifa ké bushi cong @ Our calligraphy class is not from 9 to jitidian dao shiyidian. 11. ©   de mama  @ Mr. Chen’s mom wasn’t busy bushi cong zaoshang dao wanshang yesterday from morning to night. dou hén mang. © A: W6 shén shihou ké qi ni ji? © A: When can I go to your house? B: W6 jintian cong zdoshang dao B: I don’t have time from morning to wanshang dou méi you kong, night today, but tomorrow is OK. ké mingtian ké © Cong zhé dong dalou dao na jid KTV @ It is not far from this building to that bu yuan. KTV. ©  bi xiang cong xué dao nali © [don’t want to go there from school. qu, xiang céng wo jia qu. I want to go from my house. JF Questions: JF Questions: @ Nimen laoshi houtian cong zdoshang @ Is your teacher free from morning to dao xiawti dou you kong ma? afternoon the day after tomorrow? ©  cong tishiguain dao nimen @ Excuse me, is it far from the library su yuan bu yuan? to your dorm? © Tamen xiang cong  haishi © Do they want to go from the dorm or tushtiguan dao jiaoshi qu shang from the library to the classroom for class? III. 4 zai Progressive, On-going Actions Function: Function: @ Li Laoshi zai shang @ Teacher Li is in class right now. © Nikan! Chen  zai  © Look! Mr. Chen is singing. © Zu6tian xiawi wiidian wo zai zuofan. © | was cooking at 5:00 in the afternoon yesterday. 147——+ $A pxRe1 Structures: ‘ J Negation: @ Ta bushi zai kanshi. Ta zai kan lanqit bisai. © W6 bishi zai zhaoxiang. W6 de shouji bu néng zhaoxiang. A Questions: @ Nimen zai hé shén @ Tamen laoshi zai shang ma? © Tamen zai da langit ma? IV. 4 méi each and every Function: @ Ta méi méi tian dou you kong. © Ta péng méi ge  dou qu xué fijin de youyongchi  © Mai yi dong dalou dou ké shangwang. 8 Ta  méi ge rén dou hui zuo tiandian. Structures: 7 Negation: 1. (1) Ta méi tian dou bu mang. (2) W6 mama méi ge zhoumo dou méi kong. (3) Zhe jia shangdian, méi zhi shoujt dou bu pianyi. 2. (1)  bushi méi tian dou qu kan dianying. (2) Women bishi méi tian dou you shiifa ke. (3) Tade xidngdi jié bushi méi ge rén dou xihuan da qit. 148 Structures: . J Negation: @ He is not reading. He is watching a basketball game. © [am not taking a picture. My cellphone can’t take photos. J Questions: @ What are you drinking? @ Is their teacher in class now? © Ate they playing the basketball? Function: @ His sister is free every day. © His friend goes to the swimming pool near the school to swim every weekend. © The internet can be accessed from every building. 8 Everyone in his family can make desserts. Structures: JF Negation: 1. (1) He gets lots of free time every day. (2) My mom is busy every weekend. (3) Every cellphone (sold) in this store is not cheap. 2. (1) His friend does not go to see a movie every day. (2) We don’t have calligraphy class every day. (3) Notall his siblings like to play ball.Going to KTV at 9 O'clock in the Morning wv Questions: @ Ti méi ge zhdumo dou gi nali yundong? @ Ni baba méi tian dou zai jia chi wanfan ma? © 14 de zhaopian, méi zhang dou hén haokan ma? V. YU ké permission Function: @  mama shus, nimen ké lai w6 jia da lanqit. © Baba shud, wo ké mai zhe zhi shouji. © Wo jido Ma Antong, ni ké jido wd Xido MA. Structures: P Negation: o Mama shuo, wo bu ké mai zhé zht shé © Ni bo ké zai tashiiguan limian chi dongxi. ©  duibiigi, ni bi ké zai zhé zhaoxiang. A Questions: @ A: Wo ké bi ké qu kan nimen de lanqitt bisai? B:  wén @ A: Wo xiang chi ni de baozi, ké ma? B:  a. © A:  shini de shi ma?  ké kankan ma? B: Duibigi, na bushi w6 de shi. Usage: 2. (1)  bu ké mingtian 1ai? (2) W6 ké bi ké mai yi zhi xin shouji? 3. A: Mama, wo ké bt ké mai zhé zhi shoujr? B:  LESSON * 7 * #EWSE KTV / Questions: @ Where does he go every weekend to exercise? © Does your dad eat dinner at home every day? © Does every one of his photos look nice? Function: eG My mom said you can come to my house to play basketball. © Dad saidI can buy this cellphone. © My name is Ma An-tong. You can call me Xiao Ma. Structures: ; ee Negation: @ Mom says I can’t sell this cellphone. @ You cannot eat in the library. 8 Sir, excuse me. You cannot take pictures here. ; pf Questions: @ A: Can! go watch your basketball game? B: No problem. © A: I want to eat your baozi. Would that be okay? B: Sure. © A: Is this your book? Can I check it out? B: Sorry, that’s not my book. Usage: 2. (1) Can you come tomorrow? (2) Can I buy a new cellphone? 3. A: Mom, can I buy this cellphone? B: Yes. 149———- $KPRRB1 ssroom Activities _ LLP PIAA Dt OT PLA I. What Are They Doing? Goal: Learning to describe an activity in progress. Task: Please look at the pictures below and describe what they are doing and how well they are doing it. ne ia "i II. Daily Routines Goal: Learning to describe actions that take place at certain points in time or during certain time frames. Task 1: The table below shows |: 84 Xiaoming’s daily routine. Please refer to it to complete the sentences in the far right column. 150LESSON * 7 * FE ABE KTV Going to KTV at 9 O'clock in the Morning ALA SBE] ERR » | fee | APR: | Hote 3 | ERE ° | fs te AA ACHE 3] | PRI EY AR ig ° fis Fo te AA 151oSRP CRE I Task 2: Pair up with a classmate and take turns telling each other what each of you did yesterday. Report your findings to the class. AP ee: Name of classmate _£ Morning & 4- Noon 220009 a ¥F + Afternoon A A ag, _- Evening 152LESSON * 7 * # EASE KTV Going to KTV at 9 O’clock inthe Morning III. Daily Activity Survey Goal: Learning to talk about habitual actions. Learning to tell and ask about time. Task 1: Interview your classmates and find out which of the following activities is something they do everyday. Write down their names and ask when they usually do these things. ky ayo ode | Bp x | | 2%) 2090900 TOD 4 iM 153——_—<—<_- RP RR 1 Task 2: What are some of the things that people in your family have to do every day or weekend? IV. Scheduling an Appointment Goal: Learning to make an appointment with a friend. Task: It is the weekend and you want to go out with your friend. Pair up with a classmate and write down your conversation. (Try to limit it to 10 sentences or less.) You may use the following words: 4 ¥ , iL, VLA, AMR, t+ FRR , BER. V. Advertisements Goal: Learning to describe an activity in progress or that takes place, at a point in time or during a certain time frame. Task: You see the following poster at school. Tell your classmates what you see and ask if they are interested. Other students can ask questions about the activity shown, such as training time and location. We Want You!! BEAT PR (Dragon Boat Team) Requirements: Sw. SR—-BPR 4n BH Bl] Practice time: 42K 6:30~9:00 am Bo 2 M8 Xindian bib 7 Bde 154LESSON ¢ 7 * #EASE KTV Going to KTV at 9 O'clock in the Morning {t, Bits of Chinese Culture KTV — A Popular Leisure Activity in Taiwan In Taiwan, singing is a very popular activity for people of all ages. Many people enjoy singing, at old- fashioned karaoke (KTV) bars and the more hip KTV chains. Some families even have a karaoke machine at home that allows them to sing whenever the mood strikes, or to invite friends over to join in on the fun. Some banquet venues even have a karaoke station where guests can sing whenever they like, thereby entertaining the other guests while they eat. KTV rooms People don’t need a reason to go sing. They do it in their free time for birthdays, or for other celebrations. Due to its popularity, newer KTV’s are providing a wider range of services, including serving a wide selection of food and drinks to attract more customers. Singing in KTVs (HRGHR) aD | 155—————_e ARP RR 1 156 Notes on Pinyin and Pronunciation Pinyin Rules a? When the vowel “u” is followed by “en” and is preceded by a consonant, the “e” is omitted and the spelling becomes “-un”. The Lesson 2. ea? e”, however, is still pronounced, e.g., jin @ in Chinese Punctuation Marks Chinese punctuation marks were designed based on the Western system. While a number of them are similar in forms and functions to their Western counterparts, some had been created locally, as shown below. Marks 1 , 2 ; 3 4! 5 ? 6 C) 7 ° 8 a 9 ry 10 . 11. snmm 12 } —— 13 14 WW ¢ 16 (CY 16 . Pinyin douhao fén maohao jingtanhao wenhao guahao juhao yinhao shuangyinhao dtnhao shanji¢éhao  zhuanminghao shiminghao planminghao jian Functions - comma ~ semicolon colon ~ exclamation - question mark parentheses _ period single quotation mark double quotation mark enumeration ellipsis em dash ~ name mark title marks single title marks separator mark 156LESSON ¢ Ze %iEARH KIV Going to KTV at 9 O'clock in the Morning > quae Self-Assessment Checklist I can tell and ask about time. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can describe an activity that takes place at a point in time (time-when) or during a certain frame (time-duration). 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can make appointments with friends. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can talk about a habitual activity. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 157# NER eK pd oh Taking a Train to Tainan “ @ B® Learning Objectives Topic: % ?@ 1 A Transportation + Learning the names of different types of transportation and talking about getting to destinations. + Learning to talk about some one’s plans for their free time. + Learning to make simple comparisons about various modes of transportation. + Learning to explain likes and dislikes.BREE Sih Taking a Train to Tainan ES 3$— Dialogue I 160 4o aA 40 oA 4o oA 40 oA 4o : AR KRORAKES HM: > BB ? > RAB KBE o > KEABT > RoMseA LSM LMR: | > TEBREMSLIEKE @ | > BRB RARER 12 o BAAR RAPA | > AA Raia eM GB A OR > EBS > Heb EEA TE ABT LA ©Se SU cerita Ruyu Minghua Rayt Minghua Ruyt Minghua Ray Minghua : Rayt BOSON eis ae) BEL urae Meo LU reL : Zhe ge zhoumo, wo xiang gén péng qu Tainan wan. :  qu? : W6 xiang zud hu qu. :  tai man le, yao si ge dud zhdngtdu, zud  bijiao kuai. :  tingshud   feichang gui. :   you yidian gui, danshi zuo  you kuai you shifu. : Wo bu zhidao zai nali mai piao. Zai  wanglu shang hudshi bianli shangdian dou ké : Zheme fangbian! Na w6 zuo  qu, xié ni. oa@ SC H&S Text in English Ruyu Minghua Ruyu Minghua Ruyu Minghua Ruyu Minghua Ruyu : I want to go to Tainan with friends this weekend. : How are you going ? : I would like to go by train. : The train is too slow. It takes more than 4 hours. Taking the High Speed Rail is faster. : But I’ve heard that the High Speed Rail tickets are very expensive. : High Speed Rail tickets are a bit expensive, but the High Speed Rail is both fast and comfortable. : I don’t know where to buy tickets. : At High Speed Rail stations, online, or at convenience stores. : That is so convenient. Then I’ll go by High Speed Rail. Thank you. 161——<—§\e RP RRB 1 4 23— Vocabulary I \ 08-2 Vocabulary 1 AB Zuo KR (V) to take by, to travel by 2 Kk se hu x, af (N) train 3 aR gen is (Prep) with 4 Fu wan x (Vv) to have fun 5 & FE zé Re (Adv) how 6 nea man BS (Vs) slow 7 4838 zhongtou xe (N) hour 8 EL Be bijido 2 2 (Ady) (comparatively) more 9 ik kuai x (Vs) fast 10 ##  43 (N) (train, bus) ticket 110 JER féi ca (Adv) very 12 {as danshi 2. (Conj) but, however 13 xX you x (Adv) both...and... 14 4hAR shifia oa (Vs) comfortable 15 3b zhan A (N) station 16 KR hudshi 5 ? (Conj) or Names 17 & 4  £3 : o : southwestern 18 Bak  8 i Rail Phrases 19 495% b wangli shang ew on the Internet 20 4# 47) 75 _ bianli shangdian 2 Ewe 2 convenience store 162Srey LESSON * Se #KHFSH ¥ 2% — Dialogue II \ 08-3 40 FF 4 FH FH FH DwWawW Dw a aS) > RE) > ARAMA R BAM ? > KRERYALAMK TB ° > RRL ARS PASCRMRB® > eT o ERARIMAA AH? > ate BBE? > RPE BRR co HRT UERHABE > RAB Ae BH o LRM © > RAT BK SRA WBRZ BRE ? [KAT] RED MRA LLAERE ? > BRS oe 163eSRPRRE 1 i 4 iH ES Text in Pinyin : Antong, mingtian women méi ke. Ni xiang qu nali? : W6 yao gén  qu canguan Gugong Bowtyuan. : Tingshuo nali you hén dud Zhongguo giidai de dongxi. : Shi a. Ni yao gén w6men qt kankan ma? : Hao.  qu? : W6  qi  zai w6. Ni ké zuo gdnggong qi qu. : Wo xiang zuo jié yun qu. Bijiao kuai. : Bu xing, dao Gugong méi yé ji¢ytn. Ni yao bt yao zud  qu? : Tai gui le! W6 zuo  Qi  bi zud  kuai ma? : Chabudus. 5 Se eon Ruyu : Antong, we don’t have class tomorrow. Where do you want to go? Antong —: Lam going to go to the Palace Museum with my classmates. Ruyu : I’ve heard that there are a lot of ancient Chinese things there. Antong —: Yes. Would you like to go with us to check it out? Ruyu : OK. How are you going? Antong : Myclassmate is taking me on his scooter. You can take the bus. Ruyu : I want to take the MRT. It is faster. Antong — : Won’t work. There is no MRT to the Palace Museum. Do you want to take a taxi? Ruyu : Too expensive. I’ll take the bus. Is it faster to ride a scooter than to take the bus? Antong =: About the same. 3 CePA ETO \ 08-4 Vocabulary 1 : Fe) a  x i (N) classmate 2 Kea canguan a (V) to visit (an institution) 3 ER, giidai & 2. (N) ancient times 164LESSON « Se #KS+SA 4 EF qi & (Vv) to ride Be  4 (N) motorcycle, scooter obs to give someone a ride 6 Ry Zal ua (V) (on / in a vehicle, e.g. motorcycle, bicycle or car) 13 jié ai (N) Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) Eb bi 2 (Prep) — (more...) than Names Rp is (a Gugo 9 a fe id im owing ; & ‘ 2 x Bs National Palace Museum oS owuyuan 10 Zhonggud a7 China Phrases nu SHAR gonggong 6464 bus (2# ) qi ce 12. AFF bu xing at will not do 13 «a+ fe BR  a taxi 14 ER & chabudud a. E about the same I. Companionship with sR gen 7 Function: The preposition 3 gén introduces somebody one does something with. QO KRFRTTE AIRF » O BIR KERR ° O KAKARAYASESMKGE » 165© ERP RRL Structures: The ‘3 gén + somebody’ expression appears before the VP as do all prepositional phrases. The adverb —2& yigi is commonly associated with #2 gén and is placed in front of the main verb. a Negation: The negation marker # bi appears before 8 gen. O RFRFRE SELF LER ¢ O HAFRKR—-HE KIV BK » O HARA RRA TAK © J Questions: O KERHEA aor ? O RTRALAEH Rey O RRARRLD SRF ES ? 4 8 Exercise Take turns asking and answering the following questi "th BRIBE 57,9 RE IR MIRAE EH ? | FARR (RBI ER? ABR WR FRET AR ? SF BR URIBE RT EE? FR BR te te. MBP TEA RL BAIR Ee ? SR WIRE FAH? HK 166LESSON S ¢ #HXKSFSH Taking a Train to Tainan II. Asking How with % / zé , Function: © /% zé ‘how?’, is a question adverb, used to ask how something is done. O wrhEBE ? O RR LB HK? © MK EES? O BRHF REBLA? Usage: & /# ‘How?’ is quite different from & #+& “How is it? / What do you think?’ * J& is an adverb, whereas & /# 4 is a state verb. Compare 32 18 % & Bk?  ge cai zé zud? ‘How is this dish made?’ with 32 14% &/# tk ?  ge cai zé ‘How is this dish? / What do you think of this dish?’ Describe the manner of action to be carried out in the situations given below. RYTARBE SR/ BH/KS/ RAR? 167—————- KP XRE1 III. Implicit Comparison with tt # bijiao , GHEE Function: The adverb +b 4% bijido conveys implicit comparison. The comparison is understood based on the context. @O FRuRAe O AHA BRIR o BSR O RMR > sez SMR © HE © Structures: Adverbs do not take negation directly. Negation goes with the main verb. JY Negation: OQ HRURAR © O LRA BRK © O RMUMLRAA J Questions: O WwkFo > HREER ERB opoge os ? O teAo FF > MLE SFT RG ? O HhRBZSZAREBRLAREH? Usage: In mainland China, §t # bijido can be used as an adverb meaning ‘quite, rather’ without a sense of comparison. #2 4) 7& %3t4F ELAR 4F ° Ta de  shud de bijiao hao. ‘He speaks French rather well.’ In Taiwan, tb bijido always indicates a comparison. #f = #u 4% > FLL °  han w6, w6 bijido gao.‘Between me and my brother, I am taller.’ Make sentences with tt # bijiao by using the words given in the parentheses. E.g., Ab St #2 BLE BR © Zud  bijiao kuai. (It would be faster to take a taxi (to get there).) fa Be 168LESSON ¢ Se EKXHLESH Brae em PTTL} IV. X yous: X you's: both A and B et Function: The pattern % you--: X you::: “both A and B” is used to indicate two qualities, situations, or behaviors that are true of the person or thing being discussed. O ZRAROK > VSR L> HARM RZ © O LEMAR? TRA-BA O KRXBBARBBwWIE> (2H RAwAFIA IE © Structures: % + Vs+ X+ Vs. f Negation: The negation marker # bw appears after both the first % you and the second X you, forming XA you bir-+ XA you bir. oO BRA 23K > RA BL ARR ° RBA RAPE 5 OO RAB FRA HERB RA AE EMD o AEH BAY Ce ee Complete the dialogues below using the X--- X--- pattern. O A: BR wk GE yok KBAR 2 B: ° (4H + AFH ) O A? WEF 1 EH EBA? B: > (Ha > EB) 169o SRP RR O A: KMBREEHRLARA ES ? Biot PGA KTV “BHR o (AR RB) CO AS KAH ER Fide FR ? B: ° (RAE > AR AEE ) @ A: few eb-o% ? Biot CFF OS EE) V. Comparison with tt bi Function: The -t b7 preposition indicates an explicit comparison between two items. DO LEM MRR OH AMAR SR » © HELL KH @ Structures: A Ft B Vs. aS Negation: The tt pattern can be negated by either * bi or A x bushi. O ARLAFLESEM © O RHBA HL BE o O LREFALLABEE © J Questions: O PAR RARBG ? O BHF RLMEAH ? Usage: In the tt bi pattern, degree adverbs like 4R hén ‘very’, BH zhé ‘really’, and JE feichdng ‘extraordinary’ do not appear before the Vs. It is incorrect, therefore, to say: OD *KMO FLAIR E © O *H RM KHIR © 170LESSON? Se #KSASH Taking a Train to Tainan 4% 8 Exercise Use the vocabulary you learned to compare the situations given in the pictures. Real A: GARMRBREA ER BRE KIV BRK? At? B: RM KIV "BK KUGE KIV SKLA ABB HH RR MRR TR 8 100% 171—— ARP XRz1 I. Companionship with sf gén Function: @ Wo chang gén gé qu kan banggqit bisai. © Wo gén péng zai canting chifan. © W6 zhoumo yao gén  qu cinguan Gugong. Structures: _/ Negation: @ Wo jintian bi gén  qu shang shifa ke. © Ta bi gén wo yigi qu KTV  ©  bu gén w6 qu chi  cai. fF Questions: @ Ni yao gén ta qi  ma? © Ni chang gén shé qu kan dianying? © Ni xiang gén  qu di wangqiti ma? © Ni gén bu gén wo qi tishiguan kanshti? II. Asking How with * # zé Function: @  qu? ©  ge cdi zé zud? ©  ge gé zé chang? ©  zhi xin shduji zé shangwaing? 172 Function: @ [often go see baseball games with my brother. © Lam having a meal at a restaurant with friends. © I'm going to go visit the Palace Museum this weekend with a classmate. Structures: _# Negation: @ Lam not going to go to the calligraphy class with my classmate today. © He isn’t going to go to KTV with me. © My sister isn’t going to go with me to have Vietnamese food. J Questions: @ Are you going to go to Japan with him? © Who do you often go with to see movies? © Do you want to go with me to play tennis? © Are you going to go with me to the library to study? Function: @ How do you go there? How do you make this dish? How do you sing this song? How do J access the internet using this new cellphone? oooLESSON Se #X#ASBH Taking a Train to Tainan III. Implicit Comparison with 52% bijiao Function: Function: @ Jintian bijiao re. @ Today is relatively hot. ©  canting hén yuan. Zud jié © The Vietnamese restaurant is very far. bijiao kuai. Taking the MRT would be faster. © Women jid, jisjie bijiao hui zudfan. © In ovr family, my elder sister cooks better. Structures: Structures: 4 e 4 e J Negation: J Negation: @ Zu6tian bijiao bi  @ Yesterday was less hot. @ 74 bijiao bu xihuan youydng. © He doesn’t like swimming as much (compared to some other activity or to someone else.) ©  zuijin bijido méi you kong. © [ have been relatively busy lately. J Questions: # Questions: @  han cha, ni bijiao xihuan hé @ Coffee and tea, do you prefer drinking  ma? coffee? © Ni han gé ni bijiao hui da bangqit © Between you and your older brother, ma? do you play baseball better? © 14 bijiao xiang qu kan  © Would he prefer to go watch an dianying haishi  dianying? American movie or a Japanese movie? IV. X yous: X yous: both A and B Function: Function: oe  jia canting de cai, you pianyi you @ The food in this restaurant is both inexpensive haochi, sudyi women chang lai chi. and delicious, so we often eat here. © Zu  you kuai you shifa, ké you © Taking the High Speed Rail is both fast yidian gui. and comfortable, but it’s a little expensive. ©  you xiing hé cha you xiang hé kafei, © | want to drink both tea and coffee, but danshi zheli méi yu bianli shangdian. there are no convenience stores here. Structures: Structures: ; J Negation: pf Negation: @ LAaoban jintidn zud de chou doufti @ The stinky tofu that the vendor made you bi chou you biti la. W6 jué bu today tastes neither stinky nor spicy. haocht. I don’t think it tastes any good. © Wo de jit shduji you bu néng © My old cellphone cannot take photos, zhaoxiang you bu néng shangwang. nor can it go online. I want to buy a W6 xiang mai xin de. new one. 173eERP URE V. Comparison with tt bi Function : @ Shinshang de féng bi zhé pidoliang. © Women xué bi tamen xué yuan. © Zu jicyin bi zud hu kuai. Structures: J Negation: @ Zai jid shangwang bu bi zai xué kuai. @ Wode  bubitade  gui. © Zu6  bishi bi zud  kuai. J Questions: @ Tamen xué bi nimen xué yuan ma? ©  zhong shouji bi na zhong gui ma? 174 Function : @ The view on the mountain is more beautiful than here. © Our school is farther away than their school. © Taking the MRT is faster than taking the train. Structures: J Negation: @ Using the internet at home is not faster than using it at school. @ Mycar is not more expensive than his. © Taking the bus is not faster than taking a taxi. _/ Questions: @ 1s their school farther away than your school? @ Is this kind of cellphone more expensive than that kind?Taking a Train to Tainan DDV90090000 009 D LESSON * § « EKZAEH Making Arrangements Goal: Learning to talk about your plans in your free time. Task: Pretend to make plans with your family or friends, fill in the following time slots with your plans, then talk about your plans. | EEESTa i SRFFRERAHLED SSF RMU LAMAR © ea Ero ERE BREF 4545 BAB BRR aE of Ab ey A Rw, E | APE . aA Ane 3218 BR 175+ Ap xe 1 II. Tell Us What You Think Goal: Learning to explain what somebody likes or dislikes about something. Task: Your classmate likes to ask you “why?”. Please give him/her at least two reasons, €.g., A: AH EMERG & RA ? B: BRA RARE A HUREBR ° O RAHEEM? O MAHER F218 FR? © RARE ABR 44 + 8 ? SS O KAHRERBMER ? i III. Which Is Better? Goal: Learning to make simple comparisons. 176LESSON Se #EKSFSH Taking a Train to Tainan | Task: The following are a few activities that you and your classmates could do over the weekend. Have a discussion, decide what to do, and tell the class what your final plans are and why you picked the activity you picked. Please use ‘tt’ or “Lb #’ to tell the reasons. IV. How Do You Plan on Getting There? Goal: Learning to say the different types of transportation and talk about getting to destinations. Task: Your friend/family is coming to Taiwan to visit you. You want to take them to fy 5A us. Please tell us how you plan on getting there. 177—__. $A pxRe1 ee At Bits of Chinese Culture Souvenirs When people travel or return to their hometowns, they buy local products as gifts for friends and family. This is part of Chinese culture and tradition. To help promote tourism, local governments in Taiwan encourage the sale of items that exhibit special local characteristics, such as unique foods and clothing and which can help boost the local economy. Popular souvenirs include various sweets and snacks, agricultural, seafood, mining, and farm products, items of historical significance, such as tea from [J # A Pinapple cakes wy Alishan (Ali Mountain,) pineapple cakes, sun cakes, Hualien marble, Taiwan corals, and T-shirts and key chains emblazoned with images of Taiwan. GL 1O1 KE MEIPEFIN BEST SOUVENIR 5 F Snacks Tea bags Magnets BR HER: Aik 101 178LESSON? Se #K#+A EH Bae rm) ey YouBike in Taipei YouBike is Taipei’s public bicycle rental system. The unmanned system is managed digitally and is available 24 hours a day. YouBike leverages the facts that bikes are eco- friendly, cost-effective, and a convenient way to connect between diffierent modes of transport to encourage the public to drive less and use public transportation more. Kiosk for renting bicycles Notes on Pinyin and Pronunciation Pinyin Rules When the vowel “i” is followed by “ang” but is not preceded by a consonant, the “i” is 99 changed to “y.” When “i” is followed by “eng” and is not preceded by a consonant, the “e” is omitted to become “ying”. 179oSRP REI oe —s Nie O Le ei I can say different types of transportation and talk about getting to destinations. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can talk about a person’s plans in his free time. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can make a simple comparisons of various types of transportation. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can explain what somebody likes or dislikes about something. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 180BAR BARK MALI ? Where Will You Go for the Holidays? 2 2 B® Learning Objectives Topic: 4% fi] Leisure + Learning to use time expressions to describe events. + Learning to discuss travel plans with friends. + Learning to talk about hypothetical situations. + Learning to give suggestions about leisure activities.BNF AP FZ IC ? Where Will You Go for the Holidays? #}2E— Dialoguel \ 09-1 é > BP > PM SPARMKEAWIR : REA ? [Ro RITKARAEM > BABPRL RHE? > RABI AEM © > ARSE o EH BRA ? > BR o HERA MA MRIEP RR ° > RADI © BURAK > URE MATH ? > AR Re RAE AR BAR? BE HEM > ARPT EEE ER ? > MD RHAA ETH [KRMBA? : KR. RRe a 8 SH SH SB WH « DHDHDAF ADK aACS 182SSO) gees Sy se oa Where Will You Go for the Holidays? 22 30 44 Text in Pinyin Antong Tianzhong: Antong Tianzhong: Antong Tianzhong: Antong Tianzhong: Antong Tianzhong: Antong 28 X 3 2 Text in English Antong Tianzhong: Antong Tianzhong: Antong Tianzhong: Antong Tianzhong: Antong Tianzhong: Antong : Tianzhong, xia ge xIngqi women fang wii tian de jia, ni yao huigud ma? Bu, w6 dasuan zai jia kan dianshi, yingpian xué  ni ne? : Wo xiang gén péng qu wan. Bucuo a. QU shén difang? : Taidong. Tingshuo nali de  feichang piaoliang. Wo yé tingshu6. Fangjia de shihou, ni chang qu lixing ma? : Bu yiding, yOu shihou zai jia xié  you shihou chiiqh wan. Nimen shén shihou qu Taiddng? :  ge xingqilit xiawt qu. Qu wan dud jit? : Dagai wan si, wi tian. : Tianzhong, we are having a five-day break next week. Are you going back to your country? No. I plan on staying home and watching television and films to study Chinese. And you? : I want to go out with my friends. That sounds good. Go where? : Taitung. I’ve heard the scenery there is very pretty. I’ve heard that, too. Do you often travel on days off? : Not necessarily. Sometimes, I stay home to do homework. Sometimes, I go out. When will you go to Taitung? : (We’re) going this Saturday afternoon. How long will you be there? : Probably four or five days. 183—- HAPRREI Sng ea eS ee Wea a MBs ene Barry peee ean pce aes eee ee ae ee Coober tae \ 09-2 Vocabulary 1 #2 3A + number _ xingqi ts (N) week 2 F) huigud & x (V-sep) to return to one’s country 3 qT B dasuan ee 4 (Vaux) to plan to 4 A dianshi 2m (N) TV 5 BH yingpian wa (N) film 6 PRAT liixing », z, (Vi) to travel 7 Wz  ‘ ES (N) homework 8 we chiiqu 4 (Vi) to go out ay: ma approximately, about, 9 AT dagai YR (Adv) eer Phrases 10 FARR fangjia x = to have a holiday xia ; next week 11 Fel 28 a piEs xinggqi 12 FnME you shihou aay sometimes 13 22 duo jit x 4 how long Names name of one of the major 14 2 R Taidong € z cities on the southeastern coast of Taiwan 184LESSON ¢ 9 « #k(RE MBI? Where Will You Go for the Holidays? aA aA aA aA aA wy = ty = ty = ty = ty = ty > REM AKRAALZTREREBAR © > PRA AP aK RAE Bt? > ARK ° MRA BR ? > BPO RTRA SG ° MBBS BE © > Bat RAH BRM ILA ? > Ba RRA © SILAIRS REE © > BAR AB ALR ? > ARAYA LE GSE o AH AIRE © > BRR o Rik CB WK GHG © URin— ae > HERA? > REAPER A E> WIR AE © > ASST | Be! 185—+ AP xe 3B <q Ba aa KS cou@ ainsi Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: W5 nii péng  sanshihao yao lai Taiwan kan w6. : Ni xiang dai ta qu nali wan? Hai bu zhidao. Ni you shén jianyi? : Taiwan de yé hén yOuming. Nimen yinggai qu guangguang.  hai you shén haowan de difang? : Taiwan de cha yé hén   you hén dud chaguan. Dao nali hé cha bijiao hao? : Nimen ké qu Maokong. Nali de féng hén méi  ni. W6 jué dai ta qu Maokong. Ni yé yiqi qu, hao bt hao? : Yaoshi na shihou w6 you kong, jit gén nimen yiqi qu. Tai hao le!  2% SX 2 Text in English My girlfriend is coming to Taiwan on September 30th to see me. Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: Minghua Tianzhong: 186 : Where do you plan to take her? Don’t know yet. Do you have any suggestions? : Taiwan’s night markets are famous. You should go to the night market. Thank you. What other places are fun? : Taiwanese tea is also very special. Taipei has many tea houses. Where’s a good place to go have tea? : You could go to Maokong. The scenery there is beautiful. Thank you. I’ve decided to take her to Maokong. You come with us, okay? : If] am free at that time, then I will go with you. Great! Thank you!LESSON « Q « #4 KMPH ? Where Will You Go for the Holidays? CSO BC neta o \ 09-4 Vocabulary 1 4 + noun nti 2 (N) girl-, female- 2 number + Ff yue ww (N) month of a year 3 number + 3, hao Fes (N) date, day of a month 4 - dai 2. (Vv) to take 5 dah, ta i (N) she, her 6 Rm hai y (Adv) still, additionally 7 32 35, jianyi A = (N) suggestion 8 RTT yeshi pe? (N) night market 9 JER yinggai a (Vaux) should 10 ue guang g (Vv) to wander around, to look 11 4H  RZ (Vs) special 12 RAE chaguan u & (N) tea house 13 RE jué ib 2 (Vp) to decide 14 BH yaoshi ae (Conj) if 15 oh jit BS (Adv) then Names name of a must-see place 16 «fa Maokong o 3 in Taipei to visit for fine tea and scenery 187+ $A PXRR#1 I. Time-When vs. Time-Duration Function: Time-When expressions are words or phrases that indicate when an action takes place or a situation happens. They refer to a point in time, e.g., 6:30 this morning. Time-Duration expressions refer to a stretch of time, e.g., 2 hours. See examples below. Time-When ke > +r | £184 3818 A | 48 23 / ant (ef +18 2 #9 / eA WER | 32 : 4 nian, year } #24 libai, week ° > ” Time-When vs. Time-Duration | Time-When 2013 +2014 +2015 | (TAL SAS SAM BM > BMS BAIR — 8h (48) » WyBb (48) ) 18 (8) +28 +3 Bo | Web a8: B ri, day ° 188 at Y AG a F148 A Fe) BBA / #8 FF Time-Duration —H. Wes $e AEE 418A. 1A. S18 A: 1a Ay —18-F A —18 FAs WBA RRR LR ERY ARE — {858 3A » vy (B48 5R--- E40 SE A. AF 4E ALESSON ¢ Q ¢ 344 AMPH SE ? Where Will You Go for the Holidays? Answer the questions below, using either Time-When or Time-Duration expressions. O A: tik CHEESE] A REM? B: ° (F184 ) O AS Rie sar (HH) PR? B: ° (B#) © A: ttt Bape BA ? B: ° (F182 HA ) LL II. Time-Duration ‘for a period of time’ / Function: Time-Duration expressions indicate the length of time, i.e., ‘how long’, an action takes. O RALBA—-WEM? O ZMEVRAER TREF AMR - O PR’ RRS -#F > Structures: 1. Duration expressions follow the verb directly, i.e, Subject + Verb + duration. (1) REA AMTA—-1S ZR (2) SESH RBC LR (3) RAH HME ES HMR © (4) PRR? KRIASREE OH 2. If the verb has an object, you must repeat the verb: Subject + Verb + Object + Verb + duration. (1) tety BAP RAF (2) Re ZH S SKS HR © 3) StRRESES POE AUMAA ° 189+ AP xRe1 3. Time-Duration is placed in front of negation. (1) ARATE T > AT UA ter RA ER ER © (2) 32 #2 IR AK > PAAR 1 BBA HE LE © (3) WLDA A > A Ur—1 A RHEL ° 4. When a separable verb takes Time-Duration, the time expression is inserted into the separable verb, either with or without 4). (1) Ae EPA E BRAY R © (2) BREA REA RAMEE © (3) #e4r]47 BAA AH KTV GB = 148 58 oY Hk © (4) RREAESASAUH PL? a ® Exercise Please use the “V+time-duration” pattern to talk about Antong’s daily activities _using| the schedule below, eg. ter LE ‘(a SEH #) " —Antong’ Ss Day— 190LESSON ¢ 9 ¢ 4 REMI ? Where Will You Go for the Holidays? IIL. ++ 844% deshihou when , GILL Function: The ‘--- 44 #-4%---’ pattern indicates the time an event takes, took, or will take place. O ALLAAH > RACAIRGEAR ° O HRA > REREERT - O KAZHHE > HARRRM- | % B Exercise Answer the questions below using the 44 #4 pattern. Base your answers on the AE ORME > PRERMHE ? BURMA EME > BUH E ? ( SRA A — AB) AERA EHE > MBB? RA EMR > UR TE ? IV. 4 844% youshihou::: > 4 274% youshihou':: sometimes..., and sometimes... + €nL Function: The 4 #}4%--: > 4 8F4%--+ refers to two alternating possibilities of events within a given situation. 191————+ ARP xRz1 O RAM CPAR > HiME CMH © O ABZ HMR RHAREAE HGELW- O HRM RABRARRAR HR ER a => Claes) Pair up to do Q and A. Then find out which activities your classmates do most frequently. B(4) FER AHE > UB 2 EMR RAR RUHEG ER ° HAE re ee 7 MR AE WE > URAL IE 9 APR A WAR ORME AARNE LARA > tee | BAPE At FE ? MR 1%, BURL) BE > URAAHE JB ? V. Condition and Consequence with £ % yaoshi::-# ji": / Cree Function: In this pattern, #7 presents the condition, while # in the second clause presents the consequence. O 2ARAR? RRHAART- O KRZAF OR ARRKP-REM? O© ZARA? KRHBRWA-HEKIVGR: 192LESSON ¢ 9 ¢ HARE MME IH ? Where Will You Go for the Holidays? Structures: % 3 yadoshi is a conjunction, which can be placed before or after the subject of the first clause. In the second clause, #t is an adverb and is placed at the very beginning of the predicate. QO KRRARAMARE’ MRRRARTE |! O RAMA > UHRA - O KZARE? MAURFLZLERA ° 4% 8 Exercise WREA EBS ? (ak EMDR MRBRRR — ——___’ 8? : ZMARERREE ER rb JE ? 3 SRER? KEREES M—____’ SBA = ? ° MRR me BE GY gH HE? 193ea pecans I II. Time-Duration ‘for a period of time 194 Grammar examples in Pinyin and English ° Function: @  gi Hualian wan yi ge xingqi. ©  ge dianying hén you yisi, ké yao kan san ge zhOngtou. © Zhongwen, wo xiang xué yi nidn ban. Structures: sir (1) (2) (3) (4) 2. (1) (2) (3) 3. (1) (2) (3) 4. (1) (2) (3) (4) W6 qi  liixing yi ge dud xingqi. Zheme du6 tidndian, women yao cht yi ge xingqi. W6 xiang zud  qu Tainan wan lidng tian. Zhongwen ke, women xué yao shang si nian. Ta dasuan jiao Zhongwen jiao yi nian. W6 méi ge xingqi xué shifa xué lidng tian. Jinnian w6 xiang zai Taiwan xué Zhongwen xué jiti ge yue. Ta tai mang le, sudyi ta liang tian bu néng lai shangke. Zheli méi you wanglu, sudyi w6 liang ge xingqi bu néng shangwang. Ta yao hui  sudyi yi ge yue bu néng shangke. W6 méi xingqi shang wt tian de ke.  xia ge yue fang san tian de jia. Women dasuan mingtian qu KTV chang san ge zhOngtou de gé Ni jué zai Taiwan xué dud jiti de Zhongwen? Function: @ [ll be in Hualien for a week. © This movie is interesting, but you have to watch it for three hours. © Id like to study Chinese for one and a half years. Structures: 1. (1) I went to Japan to travel for a little over a week. (2) So many desserts! It’ll take us a week to eat (it all). (3) I would like to take the HSR and kick around in Tainan for two days. (4) We need to take Chinese classes for four years at our school. 2. (1) He wants to teach Chinese for a year. (2) Istudy calligraphy two days every week. (3) This year, I would like to study Chinese in Taiwan for nine months. He was too busy, so he did not come to class for two days. (2) There is no internet here, so I can’t go online for two weeks. (3) She is returning to the US, so she will not be coming to class for a month. 4. (1) Ihave classes five days a week. (2) Our school has three-days off next month. (3) We plan to goto KTV tomorrow to sing for three hours. (4) How long did you decide to study Chinese in Taiwan?LESSON ¢ 9 ¢ sR EMH? Where Will You Go for the Nolidays? TIL. +++ 49 84% de shihou when Function: Function: @ Zai shanshang kan féng de shihou, w6 @ | felt great when I was on the mountain jué hén shifu. © Fangjia de shihou, w6 xihuan qu guang yeshi. © Ni ydu kong de shihou, qing dao  jid lai wan. Function: @  you shihou chi Zhongguo cai, you shihou chi Yuenan cai. © Zai tishiiguan de shihou, wo you shihou kanshi, you shihou shangwang. © Fangjia de shihou, wo you shihou zai jia xié gongke, you shihou chiiqh wan. Function: @ Yaoshi wd yodu gidn, wo jit mai da fangzi. e ws yaoshi bu huigud, wo jit gén nimen yigi qu wan. © Yaoshi  ydu kong, w6 jit gén péng yiqi qu KTV  Structures: @ Ni yaoshi xinggiri you kong, ni jit gen wd qu liixing ba! © Yaoshi xia ge yu bi mang, ta ji huigud. © Ni yaoshi méi kong, women jit bu yao qu guang yé looking at the scenery. @ [like visiting night markets on days off. © When you have time, please come to my place. IV. 4 844% youshihou::: > 4 844% youshihou':: sometimes..., and sometimes... Function: 0G Sometimes I eat Chinese food, and sometimes I eat Vietnamese food. © When [am in the library, sometimes I read, sometimes I use the internet. © During days off, sometimes I stay home and do homework, sometimes I go out and enjoy myself. V. Condition and Consequence with # < yaoshi:-- #4 jit": Function: @ If 1 were rich, I would buy a big house. @ Ifldonot go back tomy country, I will go out with you. © If 1am free, I will go sing with friends at a KTV. Structures: @ Ifyou are free on Sunday, go with me ona trip. © If she is not busy next month, she will return to her country. © Ifyou are not free, we will not go to the night market. 195——— KR PRR1 I. How Much Time Is Spent? Goal: Learning to use time expressions to describe events. Task: Look at the information below and tell the class how much time was spent on each activity. BPR EBARA ? 2013% 2014 20152 a 2016 2017 2018 SSS © AAREMMATEERE HFA? O PEMEWALALMITSA2 nH A 2°34 Qa@® 16 | 17 23 || 24 |] 30 31 196LESSON ¢ 9 « RLM FH? Where Will You Go for the Holidays? II. Giving Suggestions Goal: Learning to discuss hypothetical situations. Task: Your friend doesn’t always like the advice you give. What other suggestions can you give him? Talk with a classmate and see if he/ she has any other suggestions. a RRMA ERG Hye > RGA ° 197—___. #RPRBEI III. Traveling Plans DODD DD DD Goal: Learning to discuss travel plans with friends. Task1: A friend of 4] Antong is visiting from the US. Please tell the class of his plans to travel to 762 Hualien. 14:00 KKB (He BIb BI 76H ) BME 18:00 "Sette (766) B A LAR AB ) 20:00 #KRER 8:00 ~ 16:00 #2 A & PA (Tailtigé, Taroko Gorge ) BHA~ 16:30 EBA 19:00 "Om 4 Hd) °S 7:30 %AFR Buna 9:00 BK (PEIEBE Sjb #35 ) 12:30 ete Pe J Task 2: Pair up with someone and ask each other about their plans for the upcoming vacation. Where are they going? With whom? How are they planning on getting there? How long do they plan to be away? Write the answers in the table below and compare which place is more popular. eA + KM ? BRE ? BEBE ? EBA? Name of classmates | Where to? Whom with? | How to get there? | For how long? REAL eLESSON © OD © 3k 42 EMRE I ? Where Will You Go for the Holidays? : S(O ears ae ie Subtitled Television Programs With the exception to news, all television programs in Taiwan come with subtitles and there is no option to remove them. Taiwanese are accustomed to watching television or movies with subtitles, which make comprehending programs easier. There are a few general explanations as to why programs come with subtitles. One understanding is that with the subtitles, the hearing-impaired can also understand programs. Another explanation is that since there are many dialects spoken in Taiwan and accents in Mandarin vary among people and places, subtitles help people understand the programs better as the written language is the same across all Chinese dialects. The third rationale is that since Chinese is a tonal language with different tones having different meanings, when words are placed together, their tones can be affected. Therefore, it is very likely that words with the same sounds can cause misinterpretation. Furthermore, Chinese is not an alphabetic language and the connection between words and sounds is not as strong. Visualizing the words and hearing the sounds make it easier to understand what is being said. For example, if one hears the phrase “ 3& FE %& Hg BR”  shi yti gang. (Keelung is a rainy z seaport) without seeing the characters, it is possible that the a phrase could be understood as “#&/# % 1&2”  shi yi ging. “© TV shows with subtitles (Keelung is a fishing port). With subtitles, misunderstandings like these can be eliminated. ES AieMl. EEG rH SR RHR A usd Ce SB BmHiek : udn TV 199——___—<§e KY XRe1 ~ [me »y om 4 Self-Assessment Checklist I can use time expressions to describe events. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can discuss travel plans with friends. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can talk about hypothetical situations. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can give suggestions about leisure activities. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 200BPR BS WY OK RIBAS PT The Fruit in Taiwan Tastes Really Good 2 B 7® Learning Objectives Topic: A 249 + Sb $2 The Appearance of People and Things + Learning to give simple descriptions of someone’s appearance. + Learning to describe the color, smell, and taste of food. + Learning to briefly explain and give reasons. + Learning to describe tentative activities and changeable states.Seta The Fruit in Taiwan Tastes Really Good ES Perea sae 10-1 : BLAME AMEE HRA + BLEW, « 40 é é fo «Bs BARA RR HM ? A ££: PR Be —w bL so | fo: : AF BPH © [taking abite] AA a > satay > ARATHE © A £ : RMR RIM AMERR: CEM YHHE? | 4o Eo: eee Bee ? A Z£: MIHAILA! SR ARS LKR fo Eo: RAMRBBLKRR: RARERT A 2: Aa ARR LRAT © z z 202OO eCy A Ries aun eee sara The Fruit in Taiwan Tastes Really Good a x pia = Text in Pinyin Rayt :  ge huan de  jiao shén  : Manggud.  ni yi kuai, chichikan. Ruyt : Hao, xié Xiangxiang de, tiantian de, hén haochi.  =: Zudtian Minghua gé women de na zhong shuigud, héng de, jiao shén RayuN — : Ni shud de shi xigua ba?  =: Dui! Dui! Dui! Taiwan yé hén dud haochi de shuigud. Rayu : W6 yiqian bu xihuan chi shuigu6, xianzai hén xihuan le.  =:  de shuigud yé hén haochi. Ray : Yaoshi ydu jihui, w6 xiang chichikan.  —: Ni lai  w6 yiding qing ni chi. Text in English : What is this yellow fruit called? Yuemei =: Mango. Let me give you a piece. Try it. Ruyu : OK. Thank you. It is fragrant and sweet. It tastes good. Yuemei : What is that fruit, the red one, that Minghua gave us yesterday called? Ruyu : I think you mean the watermelon. Yuemei_: Yes! That’s right! Taiwan has a lot of delicious fruits. Ruyu : In the past, I didn’t like to eat fruit, but now, I like it very much. Yuemei —: Fruit in Vietnam is very good, too. Ruyu : If I get the opportunity, I’d like to try it. Yuemei : If you come to Vietnam, I will treat you to some. 203+ ERP RRL Ce Ree ea | \ 10-2 Vocabulary 1 KE shuigud & (N) fruit 2 = a huangse Kb (N) yellow 3 eR manggud v Ey (N) mango 4 & gé NG (V) to give .: 5 measure word for pieces of food . 3, a » (M) (e.g., meat, cake) 6 & xiang : (Vs) fragrant 7 ay tian = (Vs) sweet (taste) 8 ax @,  &, EN (N) red 9 7X xigua ae (N) watermelon 4 sentence-final particle for 10% ba 7 (Ptc) guessing 11 # dui x (Vs) correct, right 12) LAAT yiqian ~ s (N) before 13 7Ke jihui 4 K (N) opportunity 14 qing x (Vv) to treat sb to sth Phrases 15 woh chichikan 44 3 to have a taste, try it, taste it 204LESSON «J Oo S30) 2k RAR GL UMUC Coe trl ba #3 — Dialogue II \ 10-3 aA aA aA aA aA aA wo HH > ARERR CAA LMA KEM > AFH ? > RSE c MRA? tbe ALIA HV ABAR RAV AAMR EDS | RMR REAR? > FARRAR HY So FRA AY eR EH PY KA? > WP) a (EAP ER Eo TS AF AY ee? : RO RRBMB > BOR P Ho > AR RAR AR EAR ? > RGF HEPA > REEMA : AAS |! ARRAS ? > AREER ALR > APLAR ABR AH ° > FRARULBEE 205————* EAP RRE1 Sco Minghua — : Ni gén ni nli péng shang ge yu qd Hualian wan, haowdn ma? Tianzhong :  haowan. Ni kan, zhé shi  pai de zhaopian. Minghua —: Nimen xiao de hén kaixin! Na yi ge shi ni nti péng Tidnzhong : Chuan hong yifii de zhé ge. Chuan huang yifii de shi liiguan ldoban de taitai. Minghua : Tamen liang ge dou hén piaoliang.  liang ge nan de shi shei? Tianzhong : Aide shi liiguan de ldoban, gio de shi ta didi. Minghua — : Najia liguan zé Tianzhong :  ganjing, cong chuanghu wang wai kan, shi lan de dahai. Minghua — :  bucud! Na jia Iiguan gui ma? Tianzhong :  xianzai qu wan de rén bijido shdo, sudyi liiguan bu tai gui. Minghua : Xia ci w6 yé xiang qu zhu. Minghua — : Did you have a good time with your girlfriend in Hualien last month? Tianzhong : Yes. Look. I took these pictures. Minghua : Youare smiling from ear to ear. Which one is your girlfriend? Tianzhong : This one wearing red. The one in yellow is the wife of the owner of the hotel. Minghua _ : They are both pretty. Who are these two men? Tianzhong : The shorter one is the owner of the hotel and the taller one is his younger brother. Minghua —: How was the hotel? Tianzhong_ : It was very clean. Looking out from the windows, you could see the blue ocean. Minghua — : That’s really nice. Was that hotel expensive? Tianzhong : Fewer people are going there now, so the hotel wasn’t too expensive. Minghua — : I’dalso like to stay there next time. 206LESSON 7 Oo B' 6g2k RR PE SUMP ee relia | ESOP (relieved ih \ 10-4 Vocabulary 1 44 pai a (Vv) to take (pictures) 2 x xiao A (V) to laugh, to smile 3 FAs kaixin Z2 (Vs) happy 4 F chuan 4 (Vv) to wear, to put on 5 AR AR yifu -& (N) clothes 6 TRAE liguan 2 (N) hotel 7 KK taitai eee (N) wife 8 # + noun nan yy (N) boy-, male- 9 5& ai w (Vs) short (height) 10 yg gao , (Vs) tall 11 a B didi Ne (N) younger brother 12 ao B ganjing ge (Vs) clean 13 P chuanghi 4 IN (N) window 14. fE wing ao (Prep) toward, to 15 # @, lan BS (N) blue 16 By yin a ES (Conj) because 17 AE zhu s (Vv) to stay Phrases 18 E48 A shang ge yu rn last month 19 a6 ub zhe ES : these 207+ $A +xRel I. 208 VV 4 kan to try and see re Function: This pattern reduplicates a mono-syllabic action verb and ends with a cognitive verb 4 . It suggests “try (verb) and see”. Because of the use of & , the sentence carries a highly tentative tone. QD SHWE RE > RHR o O BRRBK BHR > RBBB - O RRRBHKRE DL? RRKDMA © O SHHRPRAZ > BMA ARBEBEG > Usage: 1. In this lesson, we are focusing on a construction in which the reduplication of mono-syllabic verbs is followed by an attempt verb 4 . Basic mono-syllabic action verbs can be used in this pattern, e.g., "2 chi, hé +7 da, & xié F chudn, & xué # zu0, 4% ting, °& chang, # guang, 1£ zhi. 2. This pattern is closely related to the reduplication pattern introduced in Lesson 6. In most circumstances, they are interchangeable, e.g., 2 KW FERA > HR " & o vs. aA YEARA > (RH o “The coffee smells good. Take a sip.” However, they are not interchangeable below. GQ) RAK PARA AF > BB yo Gt. £ LF © “I often spend my weekends reading, drinking coffee, and using the internet.” Since the sentence is not used to ask someone to try something, “4” cannot be used. (2) Generally speaking, the pattern “VV 4” cannot be followed by an object. You cannot say *°% °% 4 ek. However, the pattern of VV can be followed by an object, such as "2° 6k > HH yoye > BAR.LESSON 7 Oe 33 0) KR URES The Fruit in Taiwan Tastes Really Good Complete the follow sentences using the verbs given below. We Pl 47> BF HB of, oR y os AEA AIRE > UR ee? RGA —— {RAR SE? aH TR co S/H SERIO? RABE ? SikKiRA >? WRB % ? A: REQ RTRLGAMRMNY SERS ? B: RATA Tey O©oo0000 II. Intensification with Reduplicated State Verbs 7 GL Function: Reduplication intensifies the tone of a statement, much like the meaning of 4& intensification. It indicates the speaker’s subjective feelings, as opposed to objective, factual observation. See the English translation on page 214. QO BRINE SH - O ARAM WHE? BF - O PMaAUAARS SSHKE? Structures: 1. No degree adverbs can be used with reduplication. For example, one cannot say *iS 4K AIRF HM Zhe bei cha hén xiangxidng de, since both 7K and reduplication intensity, 2. Note that there is a 4) de after the reduplicated state verbs. So, it is not *i& 7 & &   cha xiangxiang, but rather 244 F F 44 © Zhe bei cha xiang xiang de. ‘This cup of tea smells good.’ When there are two state verbs in a sequence, the first 4) de can be omitted. For example, we say #48 7k RF F At a4) ° Na zhong shuigud xiangxiang tidntian de. ‘That fruit is fragrant and sweet.’ 209————- BRP XR 1 3. Not all state verbs can be reduplicated. For example, those in the right column below cannot be repeated. : oR L i tes as Db Usage: Subjective feelings are often expressed in praise or criticism, e.g., when we order coffee, we say 2 — #K ake! and not * BF — + ahah 44 Wye ! as ordering is factual, not expressive. - (i) III. Clause as Modifiers of Nouns , Function: Clauses in Chinese can also be used to modify nouns. @O FRYHKREBR> O HBHA ARR ° @O Wt eR O FRRARVGMALE RH o O REAM ALLRD © O Biste FH ARS ° 210LESSON ¢7 Oe 33 ay RAR Structures: Clauses, like all modifiers in Chinese, always precede the nouns they modify. The modification marker 4) de comes directly in front of the noun modified. A relative clause itself can be either affirmative, see examples above, or negative, see below. fp Negation: O Fie LA FIRIRA DIE © O FKERTHAATUER BGR © © KRERMASAELS GHEE - Usage: Up to this lesson, we have seen that modifiers of nouns include clauses, nouns, adjectives, and verbs. These are all placed in front of the nouns they modify. e a >) Combine the sentences below into one sentence with a relative clause. HORA Ae te 1 LF > ARE LF ARF MS © HO AA A He He 9 AME OL FAR BES © ER FRAIL ERFRA-BE TEML SH EIR A ° MLS LL SHEE WFEG Ro Re EKG AMER ° ‘o1ilos;otlsd 211——— ERP RR 1 IV. Change in Situation with Sentential 7 le , €ELL Function: The sentential 7 Je indicates change in situation, i.e., some change has taken place with a new situation resulting. QO wT - O AGHARKT > O REAFRHAZST > O RREZHK AAMT - Structures: The sentential f /e appears at the very end of the sentence, which can be either affirmative or negative. JF Negation: O RAF Qwest T° O VARAMRFKT » O ANMFREARAS Tt ° JF Questions: O RM CFR T SH? QO RAS PXHBAST O RINMAKERT SH? a ? Describe the pictures using the sentential 7 /e. RRR BR (CB) Ge AES HFT ° C484 FX) 212LESSON 7 Oo 8 ay ok RR re SUMO CUM Pe rl pA V. Cause and Effect with B 4 yin > ALA sudyir: / €2LL Lo Function: The ‘Al & yin > FF LX sudyi--” pattern links clauses to indicate cause and effect. QO ARREERAALRYD > PURER AT © O AAKBSART > PURBE EM O HARA GHR’ MAKE RM OR ° O ARARAMMAMET RK MURA AR - Usage: The two conjuctions, A) & yin and fA YA sudyi, almost always appear as pairs in sentences, while in English, for example, pairing does not happen. Pairing is a reinforcement strategy. In Chinese, cause almost always comes before effect. @ 3 a eure ’ Connect the sentences below RRERPASRMRE: RKBRKF © AARRERPAGRHRE> HFUEBRMKE ° RAR A ABR ER o ARR FEA AE RB HA IR ° Sa R-RREBA ? BPIBRIEBA RG Fe M PG SP SC FAI P MARTA © ee a) 213———« RP RRB 1 Grammar Hopes ae in Pinyin and English ° 2 I. VV 4 kan wo try and see Function: @  bai kafei hén xiang, ni hé Function: @ This cup of coffee smells really good. Taste it. ©  ni  chang de hén hao, © [ve heard that you sing well. I’d like to wo xiang tingtingkan. hear. © Najia canting de cai hén hdochi, w6 © The food in that restaurant is very good. I'd xiang qu chichikan. like to try it and see for myself. 0G Taiwan de yé hén ySuming, zhé ge 0 Taiwan’s night markets are well known. I’d like to wander around (one) this weekend and see for myself. zhoumo w6 xiang qu guangguangkan. II. Intensification with Reduplicated State Verbs Function: Function: @  wan nivrou ting xidngxiing de. ©  de kafei, zhé xiang. © Nage difang you hén dus gaogiio de dalou. @ This bow] of beef soup smells really good. © Hotcoffee smells really good. © There are many really tall buildings there. III. Clause as Modifiers of Nouns Function: Function: Ni shud de shuigu6 shi xigua. Ta hé de cha shi Wulong cha. Zhe xié shi w6 pai de zhaopian. Chuan huang yifi de zhé ge rén shi laoban. Xianzai qu nali wan de rén bijiao shao. Mai zhé zhé shouji de rén hén duo. OO 6000 Structures: ¥ Negation: @ Bu néng shangwang de sh6uji hén bi fangbian. oe Bu qu guang yé de rén ké qu chaguan hé cha. © Bi lai shang de  bu néng qu kan lanqit bisai. 214 The fruit you’re talking about is watermelon. The tea he drank was Oolong tea. These are photos that I took. owner. Now, fewer people are visiting that place. A lot of people buy this kind of cellphone. Qo 8 98 0G The person in a yellow shirt is the (shop) 98 e Structures: J Negation: @ Cellphones that cannot go online aren’t that useful. © Those who do not want to go to the night market can go drink tea at the tea house. © Students who did not come to class can’t go to watch basketall game.LESSON «7 Oe S304 kK RRL BME mee ter pas | IV. Change in Situation with Sentential 7 le Function: Function: @  guile. @ Coffee is more expensive than before. 8 W6 hui da wangqit le. oe I know how to play tennis now. (I didn’t before.) © Xianzai you shduji de rén du le. © More people own cellphones now. © Wo6 xianzai xihuan chi  mian le. © I’ve come to like Vietnamese noodles. (I didn’t before.) Structures: Structures: / Negation: J Negation: @ Wo mama bi hé  le. @ My mom doesn’t drink coffee any more. @ Ta bi xiang mai na zhi shdujt le. © He doesn’t want to buy that cellphone any more. 8 Women bu yao qu canguan Gugong © We don’t want to visit the Palace le. Museum any more. 4 . a % . J Questions: Y Questions: @ Ni xiang chi wiicdn le ma? @ Do you want to eat lunch now? @ Xianzai xué Zhongwen de xué © Are more students studying Chinese dud le ma? now? © Nimen bi qu Taiding le ma? © You're not going to Taitung? V. Cause and Effect with & 4  > ATLA sudyi-*: Function: Function: @  xianzai qi wan de rén bijido shao, @ Because now fewer people go there, sudyi liguan bu tai gui. (therefore) the hotels are not that expensive. ©  hu tai man le, sudyi wo xiang © Because the train is too slow, so I'd like to Zuo  take the HSR. ©  w6 bt hui zudfan, sudyi chang qu © Because I don’t know how to cook, canting chifan. (therefore) (I) often go to eat at restaurants. ©  wo bi zhidao zai nali mai pido, @ Because I don’t know where to buy sudyi xiang ging ni bang w6 mai. tickets, (so) (I)’d like to ask you to buy one for me. 215————- €ARPRRE1 I. Which One Do You Prefer? Goals: Learning to give simple descriptions of someone’s appearance. Learning to describe the color, smell, and taste of food. Task 1: Pair up with someone. Take a look at the pictures below. Tell your partner which you prefer and why. O WBA LRA ? ORF LRER? AN Ie A B A B Pr f,, sr: =a 8 O BRA -BER ? O eR BAM— (REM ? 216LESSON «7 Oe SiH 49K RRA SUM UME Ce rl DAT OQ KREME KEM — feo ? O Re MEKFH+ BRAM ? A B A B ee % @ w O eR EM — B® ? A B Task 2: Tell the class what your choices are and tally others’ choices using TE, « (“TF GE) 217———+ £27 Rez 1 II. Then and Now Goal: Learning to describe changes in situation. Task1i: Ask your classmates if they have made any changes since they arrived in Taiwan. Also, have there been any changes in their countries between now and the past? Write down your classmates’ names if the answers are in the affirmative. MEH PA TH? MEAP MKT ? Re EB ZKTS? BAK / KB / RA EMR Brrr ay ATH? JLB AK / KB / MA? BF ATH TH? 218LESSON 7 Oe B34 2k RAR APPL The Fruit in Taiwan Tastes Really Good Task 2: Think about at least two things that have changed in your, your friend’s, or your friends’ situations. Share them with the class. III. Your Observations on Taiwanese Society Goal: Learning to briefly explain and give reasons. Task: Pair up with someone and hold discussions based on the following five questions. Share your conclusions with the class. QO At BRS AS SERS PX? O AtERASPRMALMLAS ? } O £E8 > At BRSARFER OR? O £E% > AN BRSABRER ? O 258 ARRAS ABE? 219———- $AKPxXR#1 The Meanings of Different Colors In Chinese culture, it is important that you understand that three colors have significant meanings. They are red, white, and yellow. Red is an auspicioius color used for happy events. In traditional Chinese weddings, all wedding garments and decorations are red. Wedding guests bring red envelopes with money in them for the newlyweds to bring them good luck. During Chinese New Year, people hang up red New Year’s scrolls and couplets and the character 4% fv (blessing) is also Traditional red Chinese wedding written on red paper to bring good luck. Adults give children garments money-stuffed red envelopes. Red envelopes White envelopes White wedding gown Traditional white Japanese wedding gown Red New Year scrolls BAS / ik 220LESSON 7 Oo 3042 RAR AF PE While red is for joy and birth, white is for death. Clothing worn by family members at funerals is white and items at funerals services are covered in white. People paying their respects at funerals offer a white envelope to the mourning family. However, with the influence of western culture, brides are now wearing white wedding dresses. In the West and in Japan, white signifies pureness. In Chinese culture, white has also come to mean pure. The traditional royal color—yellow The last important color is yellow. The meaning (cpRABE) SHOR / SE ~ EH ER Ri » TEA of yellow has changed dramatically since ancient times. In imperial China, yellow was used exclusively by the emperor and the royal family. It was the color of the highest class. The robe worn by the emperor was called 33 48 hudngpdo (literally “yellow gown”). Emperors and royal families no longer exist in modern China and the significance of the color yellow has undergone dramatic change. Today, it can mean “pornography” with the term 3@ & % 4! hu shiikan meaning “pornographic books”. 221+ #APxee1 an D et Self-Assessment Checklist I can give simple descriptions of a person’s appearance. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% LT I can describe the color, smell, and taste of food. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% TTT I can briefly explain and give reasons. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% a I can describe tentative activities and changes in situations. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 222B+ RABAT I Would Like to Rent a Place 2 2 B #2 Learning Objectives Topic: 42% Renting a Place + Learning to talk about renting a place to live. + Learning to talk about environment of a room or a house. + Learning to make requests, e.g., to one’s landlord.cs I Would Like to Rent a Place Dialogue I , 11-1 224 > PRA OMA ReGWE RAF o > Av) dh? RSF > BIB RH RBR RFRA PEABE ° > FARA BE > PIR A1E Mt AAV Foie > AM LYSERE T° : HLA ALES ? > Ao RABMERRM : -MHRBER> MAR? [RRABR RAM BTUALWOS? > BLA o HR SE AES DE RD Se BR ? oe Bf ? > ROBB HiT ESMLESSON °7 Jo REMET PCL CRC Sear ET RM 34 Text in Pinyin Ray : Lin  ni hao. W6 shi Bai Ruyt, lai kan fangzi. Fangdong : Fangdong :  shi ké chufang zai zudbian, youbian you yushi. Rayt : Fangzi hén bicuo. Fangdong :  hén fangbian, fiyjin yOu chaoshi han ji¢ytnzhan, zoult wt  jit: dao le. Ray : Xidnzai you rén zhu ma? Fangdong : Y6u. Hai you liang jian kong fangjian, yi jian shi taofang, yi jian bu shi. Ray : Wo xiang kan taofang. Fangjian limian ké shangwang ma? Fangdong :  Ni jué zhé jian fangjian zinmeyang? Ni xiang zi ma? Rayt : Wo huiqu xiangxiang, zai da dianhua gé ni. 2% Text in English Ruyu : Hi, Mr. Lin. Iam Bai Ruyu. I’m here to look at the house. Landlord : Miss Bai, how are you? Please come in. Landlord : This is the living room. The kitchen is to the left. The bathroom is to the right. Ruyu : The place is nice. Landlord : Itis conveniently located. Nearby, there are a supermarket and an MRT station. Walk five minutes and you’re there. Ruyu : Does anyone live here now? Landlord : Yes. There are still two vacant rooms. One is a suite (a room with a bath) and the other one is not. Ruyu : I'd like to take a look at the suite. Can you access the internet from the room? Landlord : Yes. What do you think of this room? Do you want to rent it? Ruyu : Let me go back and think about it. I will call you again. 225ee core Coober lea a \ 11-2 Vocabulary 1 fa zi ; e (V) to rent 2 iE R fangdong ey z (N) landlord 3 Mie ké 7,5 (N) living room 4 RE chufang ea (N) kitchen 5 Ee zudbian x 2 (N) left (side) 6 Ae youbian xe (N) right (side) 7 WE yushi us 7 (N) bathroom 8 Aa chaoshi ao (N) supermarket 9 EB zoulu Ra (V-sep) to walk 10 44%  z (M) measure word for minutes 11 jid a (Adv) only, merely 12 Bl dao 2 (Vp) arrive 13 RA jiain 4 (M) nae word for houses, 14 # kong Z (Vs) vacant, empty 15 iE Fel fangjian re : (N) room 146 BE taofang ae (N) suite 17 Be huiqu w& (Vi) to go back, to return 18 78 xiang x (V) to think 19 zai es (Adv) and then 20 &26 dianhua 2k (N) telephone 21 & gé & (Prep) to Names 2k = Phrases 23 «+7 &2 da dianhua a a & to make a phone call 226LESSON 7 7+ RMB F PACU CR Cat tt ae ne ¥) 2 = Dialogue II \ 11-3 4o 4o 4o 4o 4o 4o DR RRA RAE RAW E> Mies] OF 4 TH? > ROMS] T > Het MA TH ? > BW To Te AMARA KS 0 KEE FR BK > PRRGCEAA UH BERR ? a, ET Le ? : RPER> SRRERAS & > RAH > ARP? 7 HF RAER EM © > ABR AAR FF BSE] o BA RAH? > RBA EM: MM TUPREARERG ? > Uh > AiG A BASE © > dF) > Bb e 227———* ERPRRE1 A eG a Es Text in Pinyin :  Fangdong xi ni hao, w6 shi Bai Rtyu, ni shoudao w6 de Raya Raya Raya Raya Raya Landlord Ruyu Landlord Ruyu Landlord Ruyu Landlord Ruyu Landlord Ruyu 228 Fangdong : : Xiguan le.  you yi ge wén  de shui haoxiang bt re. Fangdong : : Buhao yisi, jintian wanshang wo you shi. Fangdong : : Hao, w6 zai jia dé ni. Fangdong : : Wo xiang mai dianshi.  ké bang w6 zhuang youxian dianshi ma? Fangdong : : Haode, xié ni. fangzti le ma? W6 yijing shdudao le, xiexie. Ni xiguan le ma? Jintian w6 hui qu kankan. Ni shén shihou you kong? Wanshang ké ma?  guanxi, mingtian xiawt ne? Na wo mingtian xiawt liangdian dao. Hai you wenti ma?  buguo ni dé ziji fiiqian. Mcp w stabi : Hello, Mr. Landlord. This is Bai Ruyu. Have you received my rent? : [have received it. Thank you. Are you accustomed (to living there)? : Yes. But there is a problem. The water from the water heater doesn’t seem to be hot. : I will go check it out today. When are you free? Would tonight be okay? : Lam sorry. I’ve got something to do this evening. : That is alright. How about tomorrow afternoon? : Okay. I will wait for you at home. : I will be there at two. Are there any other problems? : I want to buy a television. Could I trouble you put in cable for me? : Yes, but you will have to pay for it yourself. : Fine. Thank you.LESSON 77° REMEF I Would Like to Rent a Place Cee clea ae \ 11-4 Vocabulary a particle used in we < x addressing people, 1 iS wel ‘ (Pte) especially over the phone — ae rent (for a room or a 2 fa fangza eS (N) OTE) 3 ae yijing ~+ (Adv) already aa ae + & V to get settled down, 4 ai an ao (Vs) to get used to Pe] #8 wenti aE (N) problem, question 6 BRK 8 reshuiqi eS & & (N) water heater to seem to be, to 7 ae haoxian: tee (Adv) appear to be (often e ae used to take the edge off of a comment) 8 eo hui an (Vaux) will ae dé 2, (V) to wait for 10 Af na ys (Ptc) then, in that case 11 pe zhuang x (V) to install 12 A buguo os (Conj) however, but 13. fT fu x (Vv) to pay Phrases 14. eB shdudao 2 to receive 15 AEB bihdo yisi oe: sorry 16 a Ba ABs méi guanxi v 4 T Not a problem. 17 A ae EA youxian dianshi x = 2 > cable TV 229———* $RPRR#1 EXIcrrma\ I. ToCome to Do Something with # 14i /~eE Function: ‘* /di + VP’ indicates the subject’s intention of coming over to do something. OO RREPR> O te Rit GR O KRPMARERT © Structures: Negation markers, auxiliary verbs, or adverbs are placed before the first verbal element # /di. J Negation: O KARA SRREE ° O WARRRA EH ° O RR ARARRARERT ° , J Questions: O UFR CMR ? O te RAAG ? O KRERERKE EMRE ? Usage: The function of ‘3 + VP’ in this lesson is the same as that of ‘4 + VP’ in Lesson 3. The only difference is the direction of the subject’s action, # towards and & away from the speaker’s location. 0 AZM oe ° O RAAB R/ KG 230LESSON 7 7e REMBT PCC CaS ae Ey ‘® Exercise Complete sentences with + VP. $82 ARIK > HAE a > MR ° ( ee II. Sooner Than Expected with # jia ce Function: When #t jiz refers to time or place, the event being discussed takes place sooner than expected. O FHM > H+ DEMS T & O Wie A A MRI T © LE-FRK- Structures: #t ji often co-occurs with the sentence-final f Je. See above. The sentences mean the same with or without J . 231© ERP RE 1 Usage: #k jiu is a high-frequency adverb, which has various functions and meanings. It can be used in a single sentence, as introduced in this lesson, and it can be a linking adverb as introduced in Lesson 9, connecting S2 to S1. Peso | Complete the following sentences by using # , plus 7 when appropriate. QO MwA HRBEMLRMA? +H QO WPARR) FESR O WMTEBSA wWReMF-F_ ° O FREAAFAR HAATLE (He ) III. Existential Subject with 4 you ? d ia Function: 4 you introduces the existence of an indefinite subject. The following VP in the sentence describes what the subject does. AER ° Ba A + RAM © FLA — (sat EBON ° HARA —WAER RARER ° AMAA Sb BK ° ©0000 Structures: The subject in Chinese is usually a definite noun. If the subject is indefinite, it needs to be preceded by F you. J Negation: % is always negated with 72 . O BARRA? O RFABRREBRT © O BAFFEZEKE > 232LESSON 77° REMBT JF Questions: O FA#HBEGEH? O ARAABRSE KIVER? O ARAAZRRK-HRELE? O BRAAF ERA KG? Usage: “4 + NP + # + location” is equivalent in meaning to “location + 4 + NP”: sot ® — & FHKE © Dishang you yi zhi shouji, ‘The floor has a cellphone on it, and # —X FH EHLL © You yi zhi shduji zai dishang, ‘There is a cellphone on the floor.’ However, the focuses of the two sentences are different. In the first one, the focus is on “the cellphone”, while in the second one, the focus is “the floor”. Compare the following dialogues. O A: HLA-RFH? B: 2 aeay ? O A: A-RFMAMLEs Bi the? AH BEML? Piece Rearrange the order of the following into existential subject sentences. O -O44 FBKE © ® ® ® O 4 Ria —)hia AAA BD ® © @ ® O AF HEH OR SAFE ® © @ ® oS) O REKR WR AAS ® ® © © © |———- $KPRRe1 IV. Different Types of @ hui , Usage: There are two different types of @ hui. The first one, as presented in Lesson 5, refers to “acquired skills”. The second one, in this lesson, refers to “possiblity or likelihood”. @ tetipre (#1) O@ RAFGHER: (1) O© RARCLAAtL® (#2) O HARKRACKELEKR: (#2) 4% @ Exercise Please identify the types of @ hui in the following sentences, and mark them accordingly. A. #isada " @ ) HaES T° ( B. HF -FR'@,1t£A EBT ° ( CRPPLE' S| BRET > D. RIRKMAAAR' PS, HKIVe ( E. th’ @,BBk TERESA: ( ™ VYeVY VY w\ V. Omitting Nouns at 2nd Mention  Function: In Chinese, old information that has been mentioned before or that is understood from the context is often omitted later. A pronoun that is omitted is called a “zero pronoun”. Structures: The most frequently omitted elements are the subject and the object. 1. subject predictable from contexts (1) 2 aye! (L2) 234LESSON 77° REMET PROC RE RSet (2) [store clerk asking customer] oRR HM? aA] o Sh eA? (La) (3) [A calling B] SRMLE & R—AL-TH AR ? (13) (4) °HRRES AIRS pte (Ls) 2. subject previously mentioned (1) RHE? 2 YRS (11) (2) RBI BIR o WHHRRe (13) 3. object previously mentioned HERA ARB R-MMER? RFR Zee Cewy There are omissions in the following dialogues. Please identify the omitted elements. 1 (1) RLM AAS » ( ) IR MMPI — AH ° (Lo) (2) RUA ABR KR ( ) RAEIRERT ° (Lio) 2. (1) A: AREF MIRE > RFFH-X ( ye B: ( ) FRE? ( ) BS PR? (14) 2)( adam b. Fad) A: 4A 4a Bs Bt Oo ? B: 2H > +R? Hu4zre®e A: ( ) BBL RB LLE ° Bi ARMM ( ) KR BRA BAD C De (14) 3. = a as b. tint c. ar) : RAIRAAKEM © _ > RSE] ( ) EH EHA ? 235oSKP RR 463% © ( ) TERA LR IEP BR BP: Ra Fes o BUR MEME > RPK IRIS ? RB) R— ( )RUEARE WR RAE HAM ° PS ARAPIH EME EERE ? em]: ( ) BMA BHAT TH BP: ( )ERBZA? eR): ( ) KMABW> Re (19) I. ToCome to Do Something with # 14i Function: Function: @ W6lai xué  @ [I’ve come to study Chinese. © Ta lai da langit. © He came to play baseketball. © Wohan péng lai guang yé © My friend and I came to wander around the night market. Structures: Structures: J Negation: J Negation: @ W6 mingtian you shi bd lai @ [have something to do tomorrow. shangke. I won’t be coming to class. @ 74 bi gén wo lai kan dianying. © She did not come with me to see a movie. © W65hén mang, bi lai bang ni © [am very busy. I can’t come put zhuang youxian dianshi le. cable television in for you. J Questions: | J Questions: @ Ta biti lai chi wanfan ma? @ He’s not coming to eat dinner? ® Nimen chang lai youydng ma? © Do you often come to swim? 8 Ni yao lai canguan 8 Are you coming to visit the Palace Gugong Bowtyuan ma? Museum? 236Usage: @ Wo xinggisi lai/qd shang shiifa ke. © Wo méi bi xiang ldi/qu chi nivrou mian. II. Sooner Than Expected with # jiu Function: @  hén jin. Zould shi fenzhong jid dao le. © Na ge difang bi yuan.  kuai jit dao le. © 14 dé yixia jiu lai. III. Existential Subject with 4 you Function: You rén zhu zheli. Y6u liang ge xué lai zhao ni. Zaoshang you yi ge xi da dianhua gé ni. Zuotian you yi ge xi lai zhuang youxian dianshi. Y du yi ge rén zai waimian  © Oo 0006 Structures: J Negation: @ Zhe jidn méi you rén zh. ©  you rén yao gén wo qu guang yeshi. ©  you xué yao qu Gugong. PAC Re Sten ty LESSON 77° REMEF Usage: oe e I come/go take calligraphy classes on Thursdays. My sister doesn’t want to come/go eat beef noodles. Function: e °e 8 The school is close. Walking only ten minutes will get you there. That place is not far. You’ll get there very quickly. He will be here in a bit. Function: © 6 000 Somebody is living here. There are two students looking for you. This morning some woman phoned you. Some man came yesterday to install cable TV. Someone is singing outside. Structures: Jf Negation: @ There is no one living in this room. @® Nobody wants to go walk around the night market with me. © None of the students wants to visit the Palace Museum. 237eSRP CRE J Questions: A Questions: Y6u rén zai limian kanshii ma? YOu méi yé rén xiang qu KTV  Y6u méi you rén yao gén wo yiqi qu Hualian wan? You méi you rén bu xihuan cht  mian? © © 06 Usage: ° A: Dishang you yi zh shoujt. B: Shi shé de? © A: You yizhi shé zai dishang. B: Dishang?  zai dishang? IV. Different Types of ¢ hui Usage: @ Ta hui zuofan. @ Wo bt hui da langit. ©  mingtian hui qi kankan ta. © Ti mingtian bi hui qi shang shiifa ke. V. Omitting Nouns at 2nd Mention Structures: 1. subject predictable from contexts (1) Qingjin! (L2) (2) Yao mai shén Qingwen, waidai haishi  (L4) (3) Jintian wanshang yao yiqi chi wanfan @ Is there someone inside studying? @ Is there anyone who wants to go to KTV to sing? © Is there anyone who wants to go to Hualien with me? @ Is there anyone who doesn’t like to eat Japanese noodles? Usage: A: There is a cellphone on the floor. B: Whose is it? A: There is a cellphone on the floor. B: On the floor? Why on the floor? 9 Usage: @ He knows how to cook. @ [don’t know how to play basketball. © | will visit him tomorrow. © He won’t go to calligraphy class tomorrow. Structures: si subject predictable from contexts (1) (You) please come in. (L2) (2) What would (you) like to buy? Excuse me, is this for here or to go? (L4) (3) Shall (we) eat dinner together tonight? ma? (L3) (L3) (4) Tingshu6 Taiwan  hén duo xiaocht. (4) (I’ve) heard that Taiwan has lots of (LS) (different kinds of) light repasts. (L5) 2. subject previously mentioned 2. subject previously mentioned (1) W6 xing Wang, jiao  (L1) (1) Tam surnamed Wang. (I) am called (2) W6 chang da lanqit, yé chang ti ziqiu. Kaiwen. (L1) (L3) (2) I often play basketball and (I) often play football. (L3) 3. object previously mentioned 3. object previously mentioned Zuotian péng gé wo yi ge manggud, wo bu xiang chi. 238 Yesterday, a friend gave me a mango. I don’t want to eat (it).LESSON 77+ RBMBF nesters I. Life in Taiwan / Photo Journal Goal: Learning to use indefinite subjects to describe events. Task: [5] took a walk in his neighborhood on Sunday and took a few photos. He plans to upload them to Facebook. Please help him write down captions for each one. Describe where the actions took place. O A-WEAASRHER- 239———- HP XR 1 SLY 7 >= SAL7P~ S77 II. Where I Live Goal: Learning to talk about the environment of a room or house. Task: Pair up with a classmate and describe your current residence or your residence back in your home country. As you listen to your partner, draw a floor plan of their house and label each room. 5 IIL. Story-telling Goal: Learning to comprehend a passage and add things to it. Task: Form groups of two or three. Read the following story and complete it with your partners. Read the completed story to the class. Evaluate each group’s work. EK MEMAMRALCSOA T° REM —-MARR > th? SR ARG ORL E TRRMAP-BET LE CRERT © te ROGER > MUBREG ALESIS HEY RRL: EME DRERE To tee SRAMEW EBM WIMAMT? FARR te BRE RRMEMHE oo (AHR!) 240LESSON 77° REMRF IV. For Rent Ads Goal: Learning to understand rental advertisements. Task: You and your friend see the rent ad below. Carry out a discussion based on the following questions. e Fo. Ue yb . AA. BR WEE > ARF was. 3% > RARER Afa-BEh? FAKE Habk } BRA BBRAARA SRO R#H EET AA 02-73889012 0988123456 fais RFA BS >? ALIS TARA ? RRA > MBIT SBSH ? MA Sas ? si e006 C8 hlUO8lCUO He As URI AL AE OD FSD FF H ? fF te PARI A? Att ME? 241Se eee ll V. Something’s Wrong with My Room Goal: Learning to make requests, e.g., to your landlord. Task: You have just started renting a place, but you have discovered that there is something wrong with the internet and the kitchen has no hot running water. Call your landlord, tell him / her of the problems, and ask him / her to take care of them. (Have a classmate role play the landlord.) 242LESSON «77° REMBT {€. Bits of Cg Renting a Place in Taiwan Though it is possible to find rental apartments through real estate agents, in Taiwan, it is more common for landlords to rent their own places. Renting a place in Taiwan is very much a free market. In other words, while there are going prices for renting apartments, the final amount is determined by the landlord and it is possible to bargain the rent down. Therefore, it is best to shop around and haggle with the landlord to get a better price. Once an agreement is reached and written down on a lease, it has legal effect. Also in Taiwan, application fees or background screening fees are not necessary. However, the landlord might ask for a deposit of up to two months’ rent, but prepayment of the final month’s rent is not practiced. ASE meee fe FE » Rental ads on bulletin boards Rental contract 243———+ KP RR 1 _—— Self-Assessment Checklist I can talk about renting a place to live. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can talk about environment of a room or a house. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% —_——— I can make requests to someone, e.g., to my landlord. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 244e+ WE BEES Zoe RK? How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? 2 71 B 4® Learning Objectives Topic: 4 8 . 1% Study, Work + Learning to discuss study plans and future plans. + Learning to talk about sequences of events. + Learning to describe past actions and experience.okt MEEBEAS ZAP XK? How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? DEV yat Cow \ 12-1 246 8 + BY 8 « 8 Beas Bs [RA we EAREBS SAM PR? > RE e > Att i Bis BA 08 BF Pe] ? > RALBSE POA-# > ASOFAS > ALB REF » : BAILA DB | DH) RiORH BLS > PARR > RREE ST ° RIE? > ROA READER © > RIT HRB SAB?LESSON ¢72* KAZE S AMP RX? How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? > AME RA ADIR AY o 2 A BRAK eT A Be EAE D3) _E HE © > MRRELH RKSF> AWIRKR- > BMP] — Ae othe | 4 Bo 8 DD Tidnzhong : Antong, ni jihua zai Taiwan xué dud jitt de  Antong : Wi nian. Tianzhong :  yao zhé jitt de shijian? Antong : Wo xian zai yilyan zhongxin nian yi nian, zai nian si nian da sudyi xtiyao wt nian. Tianzhong :  dé bu shao qian! Antong : Dui, bigud w6 you jiangxugjin. Yaoshi chéng bu hao, jit’ méi jian le. Ni ne? Tianzhong : W6 de xué shi gongsi ti w6 fu de. Antong : Ni dasuan xué dud jit ne? Tianzhong : Dagai liang nian, shi gongsi jué de. Antong : XIwang wo yihou yé ké dao zheme hao de gongsT shangban. Tianzhong : W6 you yao shangban, you yao nianshi, zhé hén 1éi. Antong : Women yigi jiZy6u ba! z= Text in English ) Tianzhong : Antong, how long do you plan to study Chinese in Taiwan? Antong : Five years. Tianzhong : Why such a long time? 247© SRP MRE 1 Antong : lam going to study for a year at the language center, then study at university for four years, so I need five years. Tianzhong : That’s going to cost a lot of money. Antong : That’s right, but I have a scholarship. If my grades are poor, I will lose it. And you? Tianzhong : My tuition is paid by my company for me. Antong : And how long do you plan to study? Tianzhong_ : Probably two years. My company will decide. Antong : T hope later I can work at such a good company. Tianzhong : Ihave to both work and study. It is exhausting. Antong : Let’s keep up the good work. Cob Creel aa | \ 12-2 Vocabulary 1 He : jihua Be & : (V) to plan to 2 SE nian 2, (M) measure word for year 3 RR jit = (Vs) long (time) 4 ae Bl shijian 3 (N) time 5 & xian z (Adv) first 6 Ax nian 2 (V) to study 7 Ke da 2 i (N) university 8 £e xilyao ne (Vst) to need 9 xt hua % (V) to spend (time or money) 10 Hee jian ie (N) scholarship 11 mae chéng ees (N) grades 12 & e xué 4 SS (N) tuition 13 Adal gongs & 4 (N) company 14 aK ti en (Prep) for, on behalf of 15 aS xiwang a. (Vst) to hope 248LESSON 72° HK HEBSS APR? . PA Ce me em OL ecto OM Phere eg 16 UA yihou — (N) in the future 17. @ dao 2 (V) to go/come to 18 _EHE shangban ee) (V-sep) to go to work 19 4A nianshii 25 (V-sep) to study 20 & lei 2 (Vs) tired Phrases 21 283 7 _ yiyan zhongxin uw x z language center 22) fAnik jiayou 3 x keep up the good work Erte ta BP > MR EER SIS LEA ? [EH RLCBESSIY-FT ° > Bt ERAT 3) BARRA SB meme RES % fl Ar S HAP Sia x Bowsq ow a oy OK 249——— $RPRR#1 HrmAwrxTsA DTDs D > PARRY a) BHF ye ee BA > TRH? > RPA MK > wea Rea P RAL © ARSE > STROLL MEM BB AFAR ? > ARR UE ARATAR > MANAG » > Re RERI ? > ARR AR EHS Pe o > AST! PRAM AAR OT ° ow BOW GO GK mz: emo  Tianzhong:      Tianzhong: Tianzhong: Tianzhong: Tianzhong: Tianzhong: : Tianzhong, ni shi shén shihou lai Taiwan gongzuo de? Qunian, w6 yijing zai Taiwan gongzuo yi nian le. :  nimen gongs! yao ti ni fl xué  women gongsi gén Taiwan rén zud shéng laoban xtwang women dou hui shud Zhongwen. : Wo jué nimen gongs! zhé hao. Duile, ni huiguo yihou, dasuan zud shén : W6 huiguo yihou, yé xiang zhao ge you jrhui shud Zhongwen de gongzuo. Bucuod, zhé de gongzuod zai nimen gudjia hao zhao ma? : Bu zhidao hao bu hao zhao,  shishikan. Yaoshi nan zhao ne? : Name w6 zai lai Taiwan xué Zhongwen. Tai hao le! Na women jit ké zai jianmian le. 250How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? Yuemei Yuemei Yuemei Yuemei Yuemei Yuemei + Text in English Tianzhong: Tianzhong: Tianzhong: Tianzhong: Tianzhong: Tianzhong: LESSON °72¢ AEBS ANP RK? : When did you come to Taiwan to work, Tianzhong? Last year. I have been working in Taiwan for a year. : Why does your company pay tuition for you? Because our company does business with Taiwanese. My boss wants us all to speak Chinese. : I think your company is really good. By the way, what do you plan to do when you go back to your country? : After I go back home, I would like to find a job (that gives me) opportunities to speak Chinese. Not a bad idea. Is that kind of job easy to find in your country? : I don’t know if they are easy to find, but Iam going to try. What if they are hard to find? : Then, I would come back to Taiwan to study Chinese. Great. That way we could see each other again. Vocabulary 1 LE gongzuo ah (Vi) to work 2 SE qunian ‘z (N) last year 3 BL Zuo x (Vv) to do, to engage in 4 & shéng a (N) business 5 LAGE yihou ~ (N) afterwards 6 4F hao a“ (Vs) easy to 7 FR zhao 2d (V) to look for 8 LYE gongzuo & KR (N) job, work 9 Se tK zhé 4 (N) this kind (of) 10 Re gudjia 44 (N) country 11 shi Pp (Vi) to try 251+ $APxRe1 12 nan ey (Vs) hard to, difficult to 13 AS name ae (Ptc) then 14 zai is (Ady) again Phrases 4 to give it a try, BAe hishika ares 1 A AA “ev ons to try and see what happens I, xian > zai-’ first..., and then... > CHL Function: This pattern presents the temporal sequence of two consecutive events. QO PHT ZAEMITARIS ° O RRA CHRIST ES © O Ht ELERAZBE ASKS © Usage: This pattern indicates the order of two events either in the past or future. QO KRFAKRLABRAR’ BAER? O RAAKAKD SHAS AARP ARG? 4 4 Exercise —> REAA A a4 252LESSON ¢72 © AEBS ROP RX? AA eee ete eee tee A ay a ROARMELRA HB iw WONT ARTA , BA II. To Focus with < shi---4) de * Cie tf ER Function: This pattern highlights one of the elements in a sentence in a past event and marks it as the focus/contrast, i.e., the main message of the sentence. 253———— $KPRRE1 Structures: 1. In this pattern, the focus marker 3 is placed directly in front of the focused element and 44 is placed at the end of the sentence, i.e., Subject + 74 + Focus + Activity + a4. (1) POOF AES] EI AY © (2) RAE PRMD HARD © (3) RAB RF RAY © 2. The object in the sentence is often moved to the very front of the sentence. (1) ARRAS RATA © (2) BRFRAARA A 3. The focused element can be the subject, the expression for time, place, manner, and occasionally the verb, but never the object. (1) ERT EAE RAN (subject ) (2) ReMRMLEAEB AN ° (time ) (3) tet EAR RFI EG Bea © = (place) (4) READ BRERA © (manner ) BUT NOT, *# Hi8 fF] BRR Fa © (object ) J Negation: The negation marker # bi always goes before < shi. O HARFRFLEABH? CO FERN EBLE RH ? O RARE SHAE H © ty _/ Questions: O Re MA RH ? O Hee RRs EHH? O hOB A OHH ? Usage: 1. Sometimes x shi can be omitted in the 7 -+- 4) pattern. (1) & (HX) RMRA—ACKAe (2) RC KR) HHRBRA © 2. This pattern can be used to ask a wh-question (who, when, how, where) about an event in the past, however, it does not work when “what” is the object. (1) eet SEAR ? (who ) 954 (2) feu xt H+ JE BR RB RD ? (when )CTA AT CT ome hie OC Pelee ee LESSON ¢72 ek AEBSS AMP? (3) Re HA ? (how ) (4) Uke ZEB ABT BRAY ? (where ) UR RH ER BA AY ? ( object ) Based on the pictures given below, play out the A and B roles. A: te Geter A: we) KBR ? Bi: tee B: B: EER AY ° [BY At CERES ? ) A: (BRR? ) B: a B: L TIL. 4% yihou after... ) CERES Function: In this lesson 144% yihou is basically a noun but covers two different functions. In Dialogue I, it is used alone, just like a time word, meaning some time in the future. In Dialogue II, it is used together with two events, connecting then sequentially, i.e., after A, B.... 255——* RP XLRI Structures: Dialogue I Structure: OO RPL AE LE © O HMUBRERAE HE? Dialogue IT Structure: O FAXK: RARAARERP LHL ° O RERUR: KRELMLERH PRR O KRFRUR? FALAFEL @ $B Exercise Complete the following dialogues by using 1A oe . a ae UREA & Bb WAR ? Weert err es BATH JE EE ETH AR ? Ue FE AER BY? pet EME SE BS 82 44 ? UM FEES P AY? We eT EER tT BBE MR a) ? EVAR > UR4T AH BE ? AA VAR > MRBAMRAT "% ? 256LESSON 72 +h AE82 5 OOP KR? How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? WE RMR FRAME BH SE BUA > TRIB BH E 2 Ne IV. Special Meanings of 47 hdo/ ##  + Verbs Function: 1. When 4 or #£ combine with perception verbs, they become single words. 3% HB BFR HER) ste A $F HB HEIR 2. When they combine with action verbs, #+ means “easy to” and ## “difficult/ hard to”. EB ; ie - 3B HES UF fk HEL SEAR - BERK (1) BARA CHIH ° (2) 4FLVEARRER © (3) 28 4E TAF FR LHF *B © Structures: Degree adverbs such as 7K hén “very” can modify both structures given above . OD Rib thw K RAF © O FABRE XRF © 257eERP RR J Negation: 1. With perception verb: (1) 18 ay hort AR AF OH (2) SPAR ARAB 05 FAR BENS ° (3) 32/0 > "BFF ALBA HB © 2. With action verbs: (1) 3 RTE HD) HE DA HF BK © (2) 26H HSL P SOARES © (3) FRM Ba BARE © J Questions: 1. With perception verbs: (1) RAE AE Red a KR AT OT? (2) PREC AME Ea tt AREA ? (3) Bh Fy Re #09 ARB A EB RG FSH IR ? 2. With action verbs: (1) SUP RAL Ve ER OY BY RAFT ? (2) RAR WE FAR ? (3) Bb A AK a SH BH RE A HEE? 258LESSON 720 KASBHS ROH Xr? How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? Sy MCRL Cees Comment on the pictures below using 47 / #£ + Verb combinations. mR AAR 259——————+ $APRRZ1 x I, xian: > zai--- first... and then... Function: @ Didi dasuan xian gi liixing zai zhao gongzuo. © Wo xiang xian chi wanfan zai gé mama da dianhua. © Ta jihua zai Taiwan xian xué yan zai nian da Usage: W6 zuotian wanshang xian xié gongke, zai kan dianshi. © W6 mingtian xian qu tishiiguan kanshi, zai qu chaoshi mai dongxi. II. To Focus with < shi--- 4) de Structures: 1. (1) Ta shi zudtian wanshang dao Taiwan (2) ‘ shi zai xué fiijin chi wanfan de. (3) W6 shi zuo jié lai xué de. 2. (1)  shi gongsiti w6 fi de. (2) Zhe zhi sh6uji shi zai yé mai de. 3. (1) Shi w6 da didnhua gé fangding de. (2) W6 shi zudtian wanshang qu kan dianying de. (3) Ta shi zai na jia bianli shangdian mai  de. (4) W6 shi zud  lai shang de. 260 C@senernei est eee in Pinyin and English ° Function: @ My brother plans to go traveling first and then look for a job. © I want to eat dinner first and then call my mom. © He plans to study language in Taiwan first and then go to college. Usage: Last night, I did my homework first and then watched TV. © Tomorrow, I’ll study in the library first and then go shopping at the supermarket. Structures: 1. (1) It was last night that he arrived in Taiwan. (2) It was near the school that he had dinner. (3) It was by MRT that I came to school. 2. (1) Itis the company that pays my tuition. (2) It was in the night market that I purchased this cellphone. 3. (1) It was I who called the landlord. (subject) (2) It was last night that I went to see a movie. (time) It was in that convenience store that he bought coffee. (place) It was by taking the bus that I came to class. (manner) (3) (4Sp Negation: @ 4 bishi jintidn zaoshang qu  de. © Bishi  da dianhua gé fangdong de. © W6 bishi zai tishiiguin kanshii de. F Questions: @ Nishi yi ge rén lai de ma? © TA shi zud  qu Tainan de ma? © Ni de fangzii shi ziji fa de ma? Usage: 1 = (1) W6 (shi) gén péng yidi lai de. (2) W6 (shi) zuo  lai de. 2. (1) Shi shé da dianhua gé ni de? (2) Ta shi shén shihou lai xué de? (3) Ni shi zé qt de? (4) Ni shi zai nali chifan de? TI. 14% yihou after... Structures: Dialogue I Structure: @ Women yihdu dou dé shangban. © Tamen yihou hai yao zai dao Tainan qu. Dialogue II Structure: @  yihou, wo yao zhao ge you jihui shud Zhongwen de gongzuod. © Li Taiwan yihou, w6 méi xinggi shang wit tian de Zhongwen ke. ©  xi yihou, chang zai tishiguan shangwang. LESSON 72 ¢ th HEEES S AHP RX? How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? | Sp Negation: @ It was not this morning that he went to the United States. © Itwas not I who called the landlord. © Itwasnotin the library that I studied. J Questions: @ Did you come alone? (Was it by yourself that you came?) © Did he go to Tainan by High Speed Rail? (Was it by High Speed Rail that he went to Tainan?) © Do you pay your own rent? (Is it you who pays your rent?) Usage: 1 = (1) Icame with friends. (It was with friends that I came.) (2) I came by taxi. (It was by taxi that I came.) 2. (1) Who called you? (2) When did he come to school? (3) How did you go? (4) Where did you eat? Structures: Dialogue I Structure: @ Weill all have to work in the future. © They want to visit Tainan again in the future. Dialogue II Structure: @ After going back to my country, I want to look for a job that offers opportunities to speak Chinese. © After coming to Taiwan, I have been going to Chinese class five days a week. 8 After class, I often use the internet in the library. 261————* EARP RR 1 IV. Special Meanings of #7 hdo / ## ndn + Verbs Function: Function: 1. 1. haocht nancht nice to eat not nice to eat   nice to drink not nice to drink haokan nankan nice-looking not nice-looking, ugly haoting nanting nice to listen to _not nice to listen to 2. 2. hao xué nan xué - easy tolearn hard tolearn hao xié nan xié easy to write hard to write hao zuo nan zuo easy to do hard to do hao zhao nan zhao easy to find hard to find (1)  cai hdocht yé haokan. (2) Hao gongzuo hén nan zhao. (3) Zhe ge gé hdoting yé haochang. Structures: o W6 mama zuo de cai hén haocht. © You rén jué Zhongwen hén nan xué J Negation: 1. (1) Pianyi de  bu  (2)  canting de cai bu nanchi. (3)  ge gé chang de tai man bu haoting. 2. (1)  jia dian mai de xidol6ngbao bu hao zuo. (2) Laoshi changchang shud Zhongwen bu nan xué (3)  fujin pianyi de taofang bu hao zhao. 262 (1) Japanese food is both delicious and visually pleasing. (2) Finding a good job is difficult. (3) This song is both nice to listen to and easy to sing. Structures: The food my mom makes is (very) delicious. © Some people think that Chinese is (very) hard to learn. J Negation: 1. (1) Cheap coffee doesn’t taste good. (2) School cafeteria food tastes okay. (3) This song does not sound nice if sung too slowly. 2. (1) The xiaolongbao sold at this shop are hard to make. (2) The teacher often says that Chinese is not difficult to learn. (3) Suites near the school that are cheap to rent are hard to find.LESSON ©1720; AEBESZ AM PR? How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? I Questions: ; p Questions: 1. (1) Liguan lAoban mai de  1. (1) Does the fruit bought by the hotel haocht ma? owner taste good? (2) Ni jué na ge dianying hao bu (2) Do you think that movie was good haokan? or bad? (3) Dian Wulong cha de na ge (3) Does the man who ordered Oolong xi  chang de tea sing well? haoting ma? 2. (1) Shud Zhongwen de gdngzud zai ni 2. (1) Are jobs in which you speak de gudjia hao zhao ma? Chinese easy to find in your country? (2) You da you gui de fangzi hao bu (2) Are big and expensive houses easy hao mai? to sell? (3) Laosht jintian jiao de tidndian nan (3) Are the desserts that the teacher bu nan xué taught us (to make) today difficult to make? ) Classroom Activities I. What -)# Has Planned Goal: Learning to talk about sequences of events. Task: Read »]s% Xiaomei’s schedule for June 6 and answer the following questions. |). £84 2% S A (Xiaomei’s Notes) = June 6 Ss 2a z Notes eS 8:00 am BRAG HEB) ET = 9:00-12:00 EY? 3k = 12:00 | BF AR Ree P :00-3: BZ ik Z= 2:00-3:00 | BF: ; - <= 3:10-4:00 | HRS (Baha, Bach) 3 # Ss 5:00 | FRA RKB EW = 8:00 pm Bat =— 263+ $APRRE1 Write “T” or “F” (True or False) next to the statements below based on the information given above. sy H4e60 A 6 A OC )AEBR> BL OR: C ) wrap: HEP LR C )ARAT? BLAER » C )AEPRR: AEE - C )AEBGER: BEGEH > II. A Day in Afi Dapeng’s Life Goal: Learning to discuss things that your friends have done. Task 1: Pair up with somebody. Take turns asking and answering questions about what + HA did yesterday. FEAR AB | o \ AMA hod RAB RR 4841 785 Fa || 264LESSON 72 © HAEMES APR? How Long Will You Be Studying Chinese in Taiwan? Task 2: Bring pictures to class. Use the pattern %---4) to describe what is shown in the photos to the class. For example, “2 7k 88 A x 7E°+* 2 09 /RFES ARR / RR RA [oR EBK/ RO HK 4°) AR 8”. III. What Are Your Study Plans? Goal: Learning to describe study plans and future plans. Task: Tell the class of your plans, including how long you have been in Taiwan, how long you plan to stay, future study plans (in Taiwan or back in your country), and your future career plans. IV. Have You Ever Worked? Goal: Learning to describe your experience. Task: If you have any work experience, please share it with the class. Other students are asked to pose questions when you are done. 265+ FAPRREI1 CSRs ety Addressing People in the Workplace Being polite at all times is viewed as important by the Chinese. The workplace is no exceptions. How people are addressed depends on many factors. The most common way to address a person is by their job title. For example, a manager can be addressed as £ #& 32 Wang Jingli “Manager Wang” or a professor as # 4% 4% Li Jidoshou “Professor Li.” People are also addressed by titles that indicate the highest level of education they recieved. For example, a person with a Ph.D. can be addressed as [R 1# +  Boshi “Dr. Chen” or as 3 & tH IR A 3X  Boshi  Yue-wén “Dr. of Literature Chen Yue-wen.” Another method of address is based on profession, such as 5&4 tip Zhang Laoshi “Teacher Zhang”, or £2& 4 Wang Yivucn “MP Wang” (MP = member of parliament). When one is unsure of someone’s job title or profession, Miss »]\4& , Madam ++, or Mister 4 4 is also polite. .. Addressing people by their job titles 266LESSON 72° %kAEB#S AMP R? PCA RA CCP COM A Meee hori eg Privacy Means Something Different for Taiwanese Sometimes Taiwanese ask friends from abroad questions like “Where do you work?’ “How much do you make?”, “Are you married?”, “How many children do you have?”, and “Are they boys or girls?” While many foreigners consider these kinds of questions intrusive, in Taiwanese culture they are considered a sign of interest and a way of breaking the ice. Conversing with friends from abroad 267———* ERP XR 1 a rem GS Dm ee Self-Assessment Checklist I can discuss study plans and future plans. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can talk about sequences of events. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can describe past actions and experience. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 268SLOSS Baz + A Rae Happy Birthday = B g 4% Learning Objectives Topic: # % 4 + Social Life + Learning to make appointments on the phone. + Learning to ask friends about their dietary preferences. + Learning to compare cultures. + Learning to express wishes to others on special occasions and to respond appropriately when others offer you wishes on special occasions._ ‘te % xe (a) ta % x (a) ta % xe (a) ta % xe (a ta % Lawes Happy Birthday 13-1 > Be) ? [ORM GB MAAR Bere? > RREEB RAMKSRDR > > RAH ES ? > AREA? HAH? 29> RERST | RUA T > Bete Rin BAR | BS RAR TR BR CRR HEF Ke > RULER? URL HR ° > BAA AA a ROCHA? AO TRIBE A 270LESSON +7 3° 2 OAKS Happy Birthday [MABAT ! RAMS BE ? > A RR— FRR MARMARA © KP BE ? > BREAD ° HE RGAE RI OE BxHaHa a4 5-< +4 4 Text in Pinyin Yijun Antong Yijun Antong Yijun Antong Yijun Antong Yijun Antong Yijun Antong Yijun Antong :  Antong ma? : Shi, w6 jiu shi. Yijiin, haojiti bujian, tingshud ni qu Hualian? : Wo méi qu Hualian, w6 gang cong Taidong huilai. : Zhao wo you shén shi? : Mingtian shi ni de shéng dui bt dui? : A, wo zé wangle! Zuijin tai mang le, xié ni hai jide. : Dangran jide! Ytyan jiaohuan de shihou, ni name  jiao wo Xibanya wén : Bubi ké ni yé yiyang. : Mingtian wo xiang qing ni chi wanfan, gé ni gud shéng : Ni tai ké le! Women zai nali jianmian ne? : Mingtian wo yi xi jit qu nimen xué zhao ni. : Dagai jidian? : Wiidian zudyou. : Hao, wo hui zai xué mén dé ni. 271———* FKP LR 1 : Hello? Is this Antong? Antong : Yes, this is he. Yijun, long time no see. I heard you went to Hualien. Yijun : I didn’t go to Hualien. I just got back from Taitung. Antong — : Did you call me for some reason? Yijun : Tomorrow is your birthday, isn’t it? Antong =: Huh!? How did I forget!? I’ve been so busy lately. Thanks for remembering. Yijun : Of course I remember. When we were exchanging languages, you were so enthusiastic about teaching me Spanish. Antong =: Youare too kind. You were, too. Yijun : I would like to treat you to dinner tomorrow to celebrate your birthday. Antong —: That is very kind of you. Where should we meet? Yijun : As soon as I’m out of class tomorrow, I will go to your school. : About what time? : About five. : Good. I will wait for you at the front gate of the school. 4 23— Vocabulary I \ 13-2 Vocabulary 1 AG shéng 7 a (N) birthday 2 ie 44 kuaile A a (Vs) happy 3 By) aR huilai kB (Vi) to come back sm 5 rey tpi 5 Np PE zé we (Ady) How come? 6 = (7) wangle ae (Vpt) to forget 7 20 4h jide csi (Vst) to remember 8 Se aH dangran ce (Adv) certainly, of course 9 BS yityan wa (N) language 272Happy Birthday 10 Ri 11 Af 12) ahs 13 PeHEF 14 —#e 15 33 14606 AA 17 PI Names 18 yey Phrases 19 +48 te 4 20 RE 21 ARR 22 AxwveA 23 ABA jiaohuan name rexin Xibanya wén yiyang gud zudyou mén Xibanya shéng  wo6 jiu shi haojiti bujian bubi keqi tai ké 7 <oo wis +o y > Wo Sid oe ota i v7 ? < x” 7 N 1a SI axa aXe xa hu a 7 SX MIs < LESSON «73° 4 0Kh# (Vv) (Adv) (Vs) &% (N) (Vs) (V) (N) (N) wis y to exchange so (very) with enthusiasm the Spanish language the same, alike to celebrate approximately gate, entrance Spain Happy Birthday. (said of self on the phone) This is s/he speaking. long time no see No need to stand on formalities, i.e., It’s my pleasure. That’s very kind of you. 273—————e 2K ¥ xe 1 \\ 13-3 \ Pea DECI Ce a & ) : HB > MA xa REE A SZ RBS te Be + WAL > MAB! SRR AWD © x @) : He! RRO SER SSM ASRIBEA © te Bo RROCH EE? BRR ROHR? x fe) : RH ABT o te Bs ROMA T MMR AEs FFU SOB = ) : SEABED RA AALS Kw? te B: at 13S RRM Fi? MAKBY EBA Bt ARTE R GT & f@) > ARR > ARAPGA BCH BE ? 274LESSON 73° 48 ik DE a eR he  B : BARR CR SRR YT -1A4A AE HE © x fe) : MRA te & RE MREARH > BSR. cMFnRe x fa) : Bysht | sate | eS Seep oni : Yijiin, xié ni qing wo dao zhé yOuming de canting chifan. : Nali, nali!  shi w6 gé ni de liwt. :   kaixin, jinnidan you Taiwan péng gé w6 gud shéng : Ni xiang chT shén You méi you bu chi de dongxi? : W6 shén dou chi. : Wo yijing dingle zhijiao mianxian han dan.  yixia ni dud chi yidian. : Taiwan rén guo shéng shibushi dou chi zhé xié dongxi? : Dui a!  shi chuantong, biguo, xianzai da  nianqing rén guo shéng bu chi zhe xié dongxi le. : Name, nimen guo shéng chi shén ne? :  nimen yiyang, chi dangao. Jintian w6 yé dingle yi ge shéng dangao. : Ni dui w6 zhé hao. : Antong, zhu ni shéng  wanshi riyi, xinxiang shi :   275ee cen aze ll ~ Text in English : Yijun, thank you for asking me to eat at this well-known restaurant. : Not at all. Not at all. This is my gift to you. : Thank you. Iam really happy that a Taiwanese friend is celebrating my birthday with me this year. : What would you like to eat? Is there anything you don’t eat? : I eat anything. : I made a special order of pork knuckles with extra fine noodles and eggs before coming to the restaurant. (When it gets here,) dig in. : Is that what Taiwanese eat on their birthdays? : Yes. This is a tradition, but most young people don’t eat these things on their birthdays anymore. : Then, what do you eat on your birthdays? : We eat cakes just like you. I also ordered a birthday cake. : You are really nice to me. : Happy Birthday, Antong. I wish you the best in everything and may all your wishes come true. : Thank you! Thank you! Cece relic lage \ 13-4 Vocabulary 1 4840) liwd By xs (N) gift, present 2 De jinnian 22 (N) this year 2 , 2 to order (something in 3 a) ding a (V) advance) F verbal particle indicating a = t M3 = (Pte) completed action 5 RE ep zhijido z 2, (N) pork knuckles 4 Re mianxian x R (N) extra fine noodles 7 & din 2 (N) egg 276ETO m ete be LESSON 73° #2 OK# 8 — 3b yidian > Zz, (Vs) a little, some {8 B&R chuanto6ng 4 Re (N) tradition, customs 10 <P Re nidnqing 23 (Vs) young 11 He dangao ow (N) cake 12 #4 dui x (Prep) to . ; ry to wish (somebody 13° zhu * ™) happiness, good luck, etc.) Phrases . . Don’t mention it. 14 ARAB > ARAB Naii, nali 3, 3 , It’s my pleasure. 15 K2R4 da  2.2. 5, most (of), mostly * May everything go your 16 0 wanshi ruyi ano % eH & yi 5 ao : xixiang ner May all your wishes come 17) ows7e a ay > oR shi 7 true. ESI I. — yi Ht jit: ...a8 soon as... , €HELLe — A #t B” indicates a sequence of events with B taking 6 Function: The pattern ‘ place right after A. QO KR-FR ROR» O H-BAB> RL ° O AR -DE > Mii Te - Structures: The two events can be in the affirmative or in the negative. Both — and # are adverbs, which come after the subject. Note that a repeated subject can be omitted as below. QO KR-FR RA CTMMR - O wHASme@-BA> RKB e O 4MSAKEL-FAAD’ RAMS & 277II. 278 o ERP RR 1 J Questions: The A-not-A form is not possible. Both *% or FLA x. can be used to form questions. OH -FR: REFRAMRS? O RMSRAFAULE-BR > MHRA KIVER? 4% 4} Exercise Complete the following dialogues using the —---#£--- pattern. O A: RRL HE ? B: ° (BIR > £4) OA: RUMKEF AAT H? B: ° (ESE BI) © A: ttt ARE RIK KR ? Bit CFR? HUBER) O A: ARAM? MBH B: 2 FE? O A: RAK FE RK Beet B: ° FE? Completed Action with Verbal 7 le ae Function: The verbal /e is added after the verb to indicate that an action or event has been completed or has taken place. Compare the following sentences. RATARBE> vs. KRERARBE ©LESSON +7 3° 4 HKR# PETA ati ha | QO RAAF ES T met o O RR CTRS RB? O FAFLERB TI —tH 4b « O ht REM EF ° Structures: JF Negation: The negation is marked by the negation marker ‘4 méi Note that the verbal T does not occur in negative sentences. O RFRR“LFR ° O KRU > —ZMPRAER © © ARMAKIBEA HURREDR r Questions: To ask a question, 4 # méi you is added at the end of the sentence. O RA CTFERA ? O FAME TRH? © F000 BR RMS TR? Usage: The verbal { /e does not appear in negative sentences. Wrong: Correct: * RIK T WER ° FIR CHAR © 279—————* $A PRRE1 me See Listen to the recording a couple of times and then put check marks next to the activities based on who did and didn’t do them. sok A# aT | Bk ET Be | MT | RT RL | yO a g qi 280LESSON ¢7 Fe 4 ARE Happy Birthday A | 2 , Bal # ko AS we? way | Re AT wT | Re AT RR etn aa aos i III. % Negation vs. 2 Negation ; Function: Both * bu and 7% méi are negative markers, but they are used differently. Negation is best understood in terms of how a negative marker interacts with various verb types. Negator oy Verb Types 2 a (FB) Action Verb v v State Verb v x Process Verb x v A. Negation of action verbs 1. A negation, there are two interpretations: (1) Habitual a. API BRAA ALR © 281+ $A PxRe1 (2) Intention not to a RAKE S BE b. t4 RFK LME © 2. %& negation indicates a non-happening in the past. (1) BRR RRA EEK © (2) 148) 2 BAR AIRE] A KTV e (3) PRRRBRERERs KEL & B. Negation of state verbs State verbs can only be negated by #, which indicates the contrary. (1) BRABA > RAB HARE o (2) Ao PSARSES > TRPAM FALE e ante DRAEMHE C. Negation of process verbs Process verbs can only be negated by ’& which indicates non-happening. (1) PRRBRGR> MARAE Bl (2) RRR MAKBR > RE-FERM ° (3) RBRARRLFLEMMAT ° Usage: In Taiwan, 72 negation is less common than ‘24 negation. E.g., RRA A + #% ° Wo méi you mai shduji. “I didn’t buy a cell phone”. In mainland China, #7% B F1% ° Wo méi mai shoujt. “I didn’t buy a cell phone” is more common. Tene Put 72 or % in the blanks and explain briefly why you did. Sentences ATF £RA— ( AR ) ER Negation of action verbs te ARRIVE > an ( ) 4 EMCEM e 282LESSON +7 Fee ARH ETM ear bg BERR ( ) KER ° RANE ( RE bo FER ( ) ae RAR PRE eee IV. All-inclusive with Question Words , Function: Question words can appear in declarative sentences in Chinese. When they do, they often co-occur with #8 dou “all” to indicate totality without exception, that is, total inclusion in affirmative sentences and total exclusion in negative sentences. Affirmative Negative Question E everyone nobody who? AB AB. everywhere nowhere where? +t JE everything nothing what? Hp JiR BEAR anytime, always never when? EE +V whichever way no way, never how? E28 BRA IRAT ° ARAL AB A AF 97 RB o eH JE AR ARR HB At EAP AP Ze EA HOA SB BUR ANB > EAB AE Bo OOo000 283+ $A PRRe1 Structures: J Negation: In negative sentences, question words are used with either 4/ dou or + yé to indicate total exclusion. The negation marker # bz or 7% méi comes after 48 dou | xu yé O #ULFEKHA HR» O FRRMREBRRE ARAER > O RFR ELAR O Fie ZFA > RH BRMEMBAAR > MREIRAT O PARR > REEMA HFT © a ’ Questions: This pattern goes with °§ ma only. O BZRABRH RBH BABA Dw ? O RFAAH EB UE AZ 3) 9H ? ie ) Rewrite the following sentences into all-inclusive or all-exclusive patterns. [SEE A RAR BRR > BAERKK @ B-MAsRit > ° O FAABR: ARF REF OOD ° O eFL PF. RLBALW oD 4) e HAY ARR NLA PARR >> : ALT > ASOT? HAS D ° 284LESSON 730+ Aik V. More/Less...Than Planned with % duo / ’) shio + Verb-:: yo Function: Pre-verbal 4 dud “more” or 2? shdo “less” indicates “more” or “less/ fewer” than planned. O ARURBT > MRD ARB- O RPRAM: MASEE VAER- O AWA BRAS FRAG ? Usage: — #5 yididn “a little bit” is often used to modify the object. This pattern can refer to events in the past or in the future. QO HEBRKES > BSB-BHPRe O FRRMWARRKR? RSMT—-BE- O wFRAABT > BY UBER rth Refer to the pictures below and offer him/her suggestions. ° (ats ) 285———§ KP Re 1 17 VI. A shibishi is it true? Fe Function: This pattern seeks confirmation for information already known or obvious from the context. O RRFRERER? O PMREBRARIRA 4 ? O KAFAZAMRADR? Structures: Subject + #2 + VP ? Usage: 1. AX questions are quite different from "% questions and A-not-A questions. It is not asking for new information but is asking for confirmation of old information. Please look at the differences below. (1) #RERAT HBR ? (2) USRITH RAS ? (3) MRERAT EA eA SE ? 2. In the following sentences, A-not-A cannot be used. 7% # x shibushi or % ma can be used. (1) ARebA HS MAR ELAR beth? "ARG ee Re ? URE TR ze tbe? (2) MRUAM To *RRUARM A ? ARABIA T ? | [DREN se essay 7 mrt > RARE T RIE? O AMWAS HIRE A o> ? UR 0 BH 2 BAR RAT © > He, RB HE BP So > yRay FAA) Bo > HOARE UE R AT © >LESSON °J 3° 4 ARH PEN Aaa VII. Comparison with sf gén 7% yiyang ) dE Function: This pattern is used to compare two people or things and indicate whether they are the same (equal) or not the same. The similar/same quality of the persons or things being compared, if any, follow —#k . O CXFRRPLFM—-He O KROEA REA AEAATHA? O tHRR—thk > MR WK © Structures: A #2 B — tk (state verb). @ 25H) RIA BM — to O RRR KB © iH sTIRR MHRA CO RRRAK-KERA ER? JF Negation: 1. The negation # bi precedes — tk yivang to indicate that the two nouns are different in quality. (1) PR RIA ARA-H# © (2) FIRARIRA — tk ° 2. The negation marker 7% bz can also precede #R gén but when it does, it negates the object to be compared with, i.e., the #& gén part, not the “same” part. HOA RAR — RH? IR Et ® o J Questions: To ask a question, the A-not-A pattern can be used with — tk ylyang or 7% 7% shibushi can be placed in front of — #& . O PRARAF—-tA—-tk? O hERARAF RAR R—IiK? O FFHERRARERE FH —teeH ? CO RPRRBPRAR ARKH ? 287——— FRPP RR #8 Exercise Match the activities to the pictures on the chart below, then write sentences using the +P — fee T i: a ee AF BR s | = i - | aa e ‘> 20000 ‘ ee #49 FH 20000 AH °. * ‘ Oo 20000 7 Ht F 4% 20000 70 s auf a re 4 53 et Ey =? me Aes w © 7 2 = ooo Zz AS aN 288LESSON -7 Fe OR# Happy Birthday 3 " Re ca 5 Grammar Examples in Pinyin and English ° I. — yi jit: as soonas... Function: Function: @ Wo yi xi jit huildi. @ Iwill retum as soon as class is over. © Ti yi huigus, jit zhio gingzuo. © He looked for a job as soon as he returned to his country. © W6 méi yi huiqu, jit gé mama da © My sister called Mom right after she got dianhua. home. Structures: Structures: @ Wo yi xi jit qu chi wanfan. @ Assoonas I get out of class, I'll go eat dinner. eo Ta dasuan dé nali yi méi rén jit qu © He plans to go take pictures as soon as paizhao. there is nobody there. © La&obin jintian zaoshang yi dao gingsi, jit © The boss was upset as soon as he arrived bu kaixin. at the office this morning. f Questions: A Questions: @ Ti yi xi jit qu xué zhao ni @ Did he go to school to see you ma? right after he got out of class? © Women jintiin shibishi bisai yi @ Are we going to KTV today jié jit yiqi qu KTV  together right after the game is over ? II. Completed Action with Verbal 7 le Function: Function: W6 maile san zhang  I bought three tickets. W6 yao mai san zhang  Iam going to buy three tickets. @ W6 gang zai bianli shangdian hé kafei. @ I just had coffe at a convenience store. © >  zu6tian chile hén dus dongxi. © [ate a lot of stuff yesterday. © Jintiin zaoshang wo hé yi   © [drank a cup of coffee this morning. © Taziile yi ge pidoliang de fangzi. © He rented a beautiful house. 289———$— FAP RRe1 Structures: JZ Negation: @ Wo jintiin méi chi wiican. ©  zuijin hén mang, yi xingqi dou méi kan dianshi. © Zud6tian gén péng qu gud shéng sudyi w6 méi xié gongke. J Questions: @ Didi chile wiicin méi you? @ Xia ge yue de xué ta fille méi you? © Sinwan de lanqit bisai kaishile méi you? Usage: Correct: Wo méi chi wanfan. III. % Negation vs. :% Negation Function: A. Negation of action verbs 1 (1) Habitual a. Women xingqilit' bu shangke. b.  chang bt chi zdocan. (2) Intention not to a. W6 bi qt tishtiguan. b. Ta bi zhao gongzuo. 2. (1) Zudtian w6 méi da dianhua gé ta. (2) Shang ge xingqi w6 méi gén  qu KTV. (3) Jintian w6 méi zud jié lai shangke. W6 zuo  290 Structures: J Negation: @ I didn’t eat lunch today. @ Ihave been very busy lately. I have not watched TV for a week. © Yesterday, I went to celebrate my friend’s birthday so I did not do the homework. SJ Questions: @ Did little brother eat his lunch? © Did he pay the tuition for next month? © Has tonight’s basketball game started yet? Usage: Correct: I didn’t have dinner. Function: A. Negation of action verbs 1. (1) Habitual a. We don’t go toschool on Saturdays. b. Students often don’t eat breakfast. (2) Intention not to a. I’m not going to go to the library. b. He’s not looking for a job. 2. (1) Ididn’t call him yesterday. (2) I didn’t go to KTV with classmates last week. (3) I didn’t come to class by MRT today. I took a bus.LESSON 73°45 R# DEY OA RUE Ng B. Negation of state verbs B. Negation of state verbs (1) Jintian bd  w6 xiang chiiqu (1) It is not hot today. I’d like to go out guangguang. and look around. (2) Ta shud Zhongwen bi nan xué ké (2) He said Chinese is not difficult to Zhongguo zi bu hao xié learn, but Chinese characters are hard to write. (3) W6 bu shifi, jintian bu xiang chiiqu. (3) I don’t feel well. I don’t want to go out today. C. Negation of process verbs C. Negation of process verbs (1) Zhongwen ké hai méi jié sudyi wo (1) My Chinese classes have not ended bu néng huiguo. yet, so I can’t go back to my country. (2) Wo méi wang. Ni xian qu xué w6 (2) I didn’t forget. You go to school first dé yixia qu zhao ni. and I will go see you later. (3) W6 hai méi jué yao bt yao qu (3) Istill have not decided whether to take liixing? a trip or not. IV. All-inclusive with Question Words Function: Function: Everyone likes to travel. There’s delicious food everywhere you go. He wants to buy everything. Didi shén shihou dou zai shangwang. My younger brother is online all the time. Tamen xué hén fangbian, zé qu Their school is conveniently located. You dou néng dao. can use any way (means of transportation) to get there.  ddu xihuan qu lixing. Nali dou yé haochi de dongxi. Ta shén dou xiang mai. C0000 @0000 Structures: Structures: # Negation: J Negation: @  yé bi xihuan nankan de @ No one likes ugly things. dongxi. © [didn’t go anywhere yesterday. I © Zubtian wo nali dou méi qa, zai jia watched TV at home. kan dianshi. © [don’t feel like eating anything © Wo jintian shén yé bi xiang today. chi. © Next week, I won’t be home the © Xia ge xingqi, wo shén shihou whole time. I will be traveling. dou bu zai jia, wd yao qu liixing. © Chinese food is hard to make. No © Zhongguo cai hén nan zud, w6 matter what I do, it tastes bad. zé zud dou bt haochi. 291——— KP XRRe1 J Questions: @ Zhe jid canting de d6ngxi shén dou haochi ma? © Ni jintian shén shihou dou zai gongsT ma? V. More/Less...Than Planned with % dus Function: @ W6 zuijin méi qian le, yinggai shao mai dongxi. © W6  bi hao, yinggai dud kanshi, shdo kan dianshi. © Women mingtian yinggai dud chuan yifa ma? Usage: @ Ta xihuan Taiwan, xiing dud xué yidian Zhongwen. © Zu6tian wo péng lai wo ji, w6 dus zuole yidian cai. © 14 jintian tai lei le, xiang shao zud yidian gongke. VI. XA shibishi is it true? Function: @ Nishibishi zai jia ding wo? © Najia canting shibishi hén yOuming? © Ni shibishi gang liixing huilai? Usage: 1. (1) Ni yinhang you qian ma? (2) Ni yin you méi you qian? (3) Ni yinhang shibishi you qian? 292 f/f Questions: @ Is everything in this restaurant tasty? © Will you be at the office all day today? / *> shio + Verb--- Function: @ [haven't had any money recently, so I should spend less (than usual). © My Chinese is not good. I should study more and watch TV less. © Should we wear more clothes than usual tomorrow? Usage: @ He likes Taiwan and wants to study Chinese a bit more. © Friends of mine came to my house yesterday. I made a little extra food. © She is too tired today and wants to do less homework (than her teacher assigned.) Function: @ You are waiting for me at home, right? eo That restaurant is well-known, right? © You just come back from a trip, right? Usage: 1. (1) (We’re having problems. We need some money.) Do you have some money in the bank? (2) (same as above) (3) (We are having problems. We need some money.) You have some money in the bank, right?LESSON 73° 4H RE Happy Birthday 2. (1) Ni bi ta gao. 2. (1) You are taller than him. Ni shibtshi bi ta gao? You are taller than him, right? (2) Ni zuijin tai mang le. (2) You’ve been too busy lately. Ni shibushi zuijin tai mang le? You have been too busy lately, right? VII. Comparison with 3& gén yiyang Function: Function: @ Zhe zhi shouji gén na zhi shduji yiyang. @ This cellphone is exactly the same as that one. ©  de shéng gén ta de shéng yiyang, © My birthday is the same as hers. They’re dou shi ba shiqi ri. both on August 17th. © Ta gén  yiyang, dou chang youyong. © He and J are the same. We both swim often. (We are alike.) Structures: Structures: @ Ni dian de cai gén w6 dian de yiyang. @ We both ordered the same dish. ©  gén  méi yiyang gao. © [amas tall as my younger sister. © Jisjie zi de fangzi gén wo zi de yiyang © The house that my older sister rents is as gui. expensive as the one I rent. Ce wo gen wo péng yiyang xihuan kan © My friend and I are the same. We both dianshi. enjoy watching TV. J Negation: J Negation: 1. (1) Zhongguo cha gén  cha bu 1. (1) Chinese tea and Japanese tea are yiyang. different. (2) W6 gén méi bu yiyang gao. (2) My younger sister and I are not the. same height. 2. He and [ are not the same height. He 2. Ta bu gén wo yiyang gao, gén Xiao 6 viva E80. 8 and Xiao Wang are the same height. Wang yiyang gao. J Questions: J Questions:  gén baozi yiyang bu Is a xiaolongbao the same as a yiyang? baozi? Xidolongbao gén baozi shi bu shi Are xiaolongbao the same as yiyang? baozi? Jinnian de shéng shi bu shi gén Is business this year as good as it qunian de yiyang hao? was last year? Shud Zhongwen gén xié Is speaking Chinese as difficult as Zhongwen shi bu shi yiyang nan? writing Chinese? 600080 oo 08 293————- XP XRz 1 Classroom Activities | I. Going to Night Markets Goal: Learning to ask people about their preferences. Task: You found out that your classmate went to the night market last night. You want to know if he did any of the following. RPE REA LT RABRA ? B:@ RA? RET DHS? G27 > ALT RAB Gii) RATE ZB = ee ee ne & | FAs "yl ~~ NEE yy aHEA 8 ADA acE ER a 1 * m lit en oe Fe n BEG zKAR 294LESSON °7 3° FARE II. How Do You Celebrate Your Birthday? Goal: Learning to compare briefly different cultures. Task: Pair up with someone and ask each other how birthdays are celebrated in each other’s home country. Check each item that applies. When you are done, consolidate the answers with everyone in class and have a representative report the similarities and differences in the ways birthdays are celebrated in different countries. 4 9b (ARE) "EAR WA EMR AEA ACR eRAM A i Hep BB BR FREAD RA — AR 295————- KP XR# 1 III. Calling a Friend Goal: Learning to make appointments over the phone. Task: Your teacher’s birthday is tomorrow. Call your classmate and talk about inviting the teacher out for a meal. (Pair up with the person next to you. In your conversation, please ask: Why ask him/her to a meal? When should you go? Where should you go? How will everybody meet up?) IV. Congratulatory Words Goal: Learning to convey wishes on happy occasions. Task: Today is your teacher’s birthday. Write a card to your teacher. . e& * 4 Ww. a — ee we a 4 NA TTY PLT PUA a ° ee e a e # @, @n. be a ee ae ‘ @*e e 0@@ e ee ° 1@4 ‘6 e0e@ oa le ee e @8e@ e es REA + MEAP YE EM PRB ° MRK Ed 44 + BEAEA ApH . Bot Es : wh Fk ° fe SBA st 296LESSON *7 3 +40 Kh PET OA Satie ha Congratulatory Expressions in Chinese Congratulatory expressions are used to congratulate people on special occasions. Chinese people value this in interpersonal relationships and like to express caring thoughts at the right place, at the right time, and for the right occasion. Most of these sayings are four-character expressions with fixed and auspicious meanings. The most all-purpose congratulatory expression is probably % $ 40 & > 84S KR wanshi riiyi, xtnxidng shi “I wish you all the best and that all your wishes come true.” “ Common congratulatory expressions Taiwanese Birthdays Traditionally, Chinese people celebrate their birthdays based on the lunar calendar, but today, most people celebrate their te 4G tradition for babies at their first year of age 297———~* KP RR 1 298 birthdays as indicated the Gregorian calendar. Birthdays are very important to the Taiwanese. Celebrations for infants are held when they are one-month and one-year old. Major decades, such as 60, 70, and 80-years of age, are of particular importance. The ancient tradition of pi #4 zhudzhoii (grabbing at the first year) is still practiced. For this custom, a child is surrounded by a number of items on his first birthday. The item that he grabs is said 4 Big birthday celebrations to indicate what kind of character he will have and his for major decades future profession. a econ aera etc I can make appointments on the phone. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% — — ———— I can ask friends about their dietary preferences. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% a I can compare cultures. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% TT I can express wishes to others on special occasions and can respond appropriately when others offer me wishes on special occasions. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% TTTER EA 3 = ’ RATE | It’s So Cold! 72 B +® Learning Objectives Topic: & # The Weather + Learning to talk about weather conditions, including typhoons. + Learning to talk about the four seasons and explain why you like or dislike them. + Learning to compare events. + Learning to make simple statements about experiences, e.g., trips.300 40 AA 40 oA 4o oA 4o oA ’ a 3€— Dialogue I It’s So Cold! \" ; \ 14-1 ye > 9b LAR EK > RARIESRA LIER © EERE SE? [RESP Se BLES ABR? MSP ET CO? [RRR BEERS +AOA RH © FRE REL LERS - > Fil o MRELRMBRAR - > RRA? RAIRAPAR © > REFRAAMAMT 18 BBA o ARAHE > RARE > ROR > RAE RS > AEB ISET HES To ABER > ERE T o MMKARESE?LESSON *74 °RAGE ! Lee Cot 6 Ti zo: RASR+AARDE: MRARAEAZAKE? # LARK ° iB? RRAFRKAEAME SET > ARBRE RK ? zo: RARPMRATRAIR PR ARSED R te ee ere sti Ray Minghua Ray Minghua Ray Minghua Rayti Minghua Rayt Minghua Ray : Waimian feng name da, w6 jué jintian bi zudtian léng Taiwan hui bt hui xi :  gao de shan hui xi Yushan chang xi  ne? Kaishi xia xué le ba? : Hai méi yOu.  nian chabuduo shi’éryue kaishi.  de shihou, wo chang qu shanshang hua : W6 pa léng W6 bijiao xihuan chintian. : Chiintian bucud, tiangi hén shifu. : W6 qunian whyue zai  wanle liang ge xingqi. Na ge shihou, tianqi hén hao, féng yé hén piaoliang, w6 wan de féi kaixin. : Wo zai Taiwan zhule ban nian duo le. You yidian xiang jia. : Xinnian kuai dao le, xiang huiqu kan fmt ma? : Wo dasuan shi’éryue di huiqu, xiang gén w6 qu  wan ma? : Dongtian tai léng le. Buguo, wo xiang mingnian qiiitian qu kan hongye. Duile, ni shén shihou huilai? :  women zhi fang shi tian de jia, sudyi yryue wthao huilai. 301———+ FAPRRe1 Fea Ea Geneon Ruyu : It is windy outside. I think it’s colder today than yesterday. Does it snow in Taiwan? Minghua _ : It snows on high mountains. It snows on Yushan frequently. And the US? It has probably started snowing (there). Ruyu : Not yet. Every year around December, it starts. When it snows, I often go skiing in the mountains. Minghua _ : I don’t like the cold. I like spring better. Ruyu : Spring isn’t bad. The weather is nice. Minghua : Last May, I was in New York having a good time for two weeks. The weather was very nice then and the scenery was beautiful. I had a great time. Ruyu : [have lived in Taiwan for over half a year now. I’m a little homesick. Minghua : Itis almost New Year’s. Are you thinking about going back to see your parents? Ruyu : I plan to go back at the end of December. Would you like to go with me to the US? Minghua : The winter is too cold, but I would like to go see the autumn leaves next year. By the way, when are you coming back? Ruyu : We only have 10 days off, so I will be back January Sth. cP rel il rae \ 14-2 Vocabulary 1 RA tianqi 5 & (N) weather 2 > léng 2 (Vs) cold 3 Jal, feng 7 (N) wind 4 igs hu &, ML (V-sep) to ski 5 aR R chintian x 3 (N) spring (season) 6 7a xiang x (Vst) to miss (someone) 7 fae xinnidn 22 (N) New Year 8 Se kuai A (Adv) soon 9 AC EE fami mS oy (N) parents 302LESSON 74° RASH ! It’s So Cold! 10 az R dongtian z 5 (N) winter (season) 11 (BA Ee mingnian 22 (N) next year 12) fkKR qititian : : (N) autumn (season) 13 ar  es (N) red maple leaves 14 =é# zhi w (Adv) only, merely Names Yu Shan (Mount Jade), 155 £w Yushan we tallest mountain in central Taiwan 16 4a  ae New York Phrases 17 Fs xi Rh to snow 18 +A RK shi’éryueé di POS Gy 2 the end of December Pee Eye ea 14-3 303—————- KP rR 1 aA 4o aA 40 aA 40 5A 40 aA 40 aA OR OP HGRER A MER REE ? > ROR T TRAE T Pe > RERIRBRT o > RUBIBRT ° EWE EAA RE + REAR ON IR fo MLA > REBATE ° £0y | FEAR © RETR - > SAM MA > ROARS ERB > ARKRG ps » > PRR ARA LRA ET I > toh kA ! WET DUET | UMA > AR SR BAL © bast A ° ae OBA AR ER BM Ba as Eos resist Minghua Rtyu Minghua : Rtyu Minghua Rtyu Minghua Ruy Minghua : Ruyt Minghua : Ruyt, yt xia de zhé da, ni zé méi dai san ne? : W6 zuotian dai le, ké jintian wangle dai.  kuai yao 1ai le. : W6 yijing tingshud le. : Zheli méi nian xiatian dou you taifeng.  lai de shihou, feng han yu dou hén da, zud shén dou hén bt fangbian. : Shi a! Nali dou shisht de, zhé taoyan. : Dianshi xi shud, zhé ci de tai hui bi shang ci de gén da, qing dajia du6 xidoxin. : XTwang zhé ci de méi yé shang ci de name ké Ruayt, ni kan! Yu ting le. : Bukeqi, xidoxin man zou. 304LESSON ¢74eKRAGE ! Lae or TL reac 7 Minghua : Ruyu, as heavy as it’s raining, why didn’t you bring an umbrella? Ruyu : I brought it yesterday, but I forgot to bring it today. Minghua : A typhoon is coming. Ruyu : Yes, I’ve heard. Minghua_ : We have typhoons every summer. When typhoons hit, we get heavy wind and rain. It gets very inconvenient to do anything. Ruyu : Yeah. It gets wet everywhere. I hate it. Minghua : The TV news says this typhoon is bigger than the last one and advised everyone to be extra cautious. Ruyu : [hope the one this time is not as scary as the last one. Minghua_ : Ruyu, Look. The rain has stopped. Ruyu : Great! Thank you for the umbrella. See you. Minghua : You’re welcome. Take care. CePA wat \ 14-4 Vocabulary 1 158] yt uw (N) rain 2 ay san oy (N) umbrella 3 we Jel, taifeng aa (N) typhoon 4 B yao ‘z (Vaux) will, going to eye TE 5 B RK xiatian RE (N) summer (season) 6 YR shi p (Vs) wet 7 at RR tdoyan fy BS (Vs) annoying 8 oF i xi z x (N) news 9 B gén s (Adv) even (more, less, etc.) 10 KR dajia us 3 (N) everyone 11 Awe xiaoxin i i (Vs) to be careful, to take care 305o ERP REI 12 Wh ké HOEK (Vs) scary 13 A> ting =, (Vp) to stop Phrases 14 Fe xiayii aut to rain 15 oR zhé ci A this time 160 ER shang ci > last time 17, owe man zou a ey Bye. Take care. ExIommma\ I. 306 7 Time-Duration after verbal 7 le oe Function: This pattern indicates the duration of a completed activity. O SHRM ARESILAT=AR? O 4A ABET—#° O F MEBs PCLT 1A e Structures: The primary structure is verb+Time Duration. 1. If the verb is transitive and has an object after it, the verb must be repeated. (1) th 4h 4a T $F (2) AoE BILE T ZF 2. No verb repetition is needed if the object is placed elsewhere. (1) BF4eR fa 7 HH (2) Bib RET AF - JF Questions: O RHA RAT-—F+H? O RAFAL CHS T -—OHB? O REMAERALAMAET EE?LESSON 74° KASH ! It’s So Cold! ew Answer the questions using the Time-Duration expression following the examples below. inal ERM PRET RA ? R-HE TEMA ° QO RETSZA? RET °° O KEEARTSZA? RAT O HeELET SA? ek T ° O WATER TRS HE O KEBAET APE? HR oR > (A18 A) O hiFRA ERAT AMR? HK oR BAR ? ° ( Fy {El 48 5A ) II. Completion-to-date with Double 7 le / Function: The Double 7 + Time-Duration pattern indicates the completion of an action up to the time of speaking. The action may or may not continue, depending on the context. wOeSeEEMAT OFT > PRA BET EAT ° MLE T BMAT > 3h) RF 2 he B44 T KET , HAE P ABT SAB BIH T° OO000 307ERY RR 1 Pama Answer une ictHesseiOT5) given using the Double it: + + Time- ‘Duration pattern. [8 REBS PSE TSAMPRT? RET RMSZAT > O RASS LIWTSZAT? RI“T ° O REMATSAMPRT? WAT se O HAMMETT SAT? fete T : O ZLFSIFTBZAT? ELLE : IIL te kuais 7 le about to / €2RELID Function: The sentential 7 /e often appears in sentences that contain adverbs indicating “something will soon happen”, 1% kudi, & ydo, or 1K kudi yao. The T /e suggests an imminent change of state. QO RTmT: @ EXRERT- © SereART - Structures: J Questions: O 3531544 BRS] T% ? O LRLMwTS? O TTHEMAKRZAEA TS? Usage: This pattern indicates that an action or event will soon happen. In Taiwan, the bi-syllabic }% kudi yao is preferred. For example, 44) + 8 #4] 7 ° Wo de shéng kuai yao dao le. “My birthday is coming soon .” If there is a time word, 1% kudi yao can not be used. For example, * fA AKO R T Ta mingtian kuai yao huilai le “He will be returning tomorrow”. 308LESSON 74° KASEY ! Maio ) Answer the questions referring to the events below that will be happening soon. O A: kyeOMTS? B: 4 KPA } @ A: RAPHE ARRA B: #2894 4 ° Awe ? FEA — 5% ° O A: Cats T TEE B: ° MB BSE UL BAR? hI ° CO AS RS-FIVMHEBS BAT ER wT RA ? O A: H+HRERMBEA? — B: FT ave | Re IV. Comparison # gén even more so 7 -€eLE Function: The adverb # presents a fact that is superior to a fact presented in a previous statement. E.g., 224 KA Ltt ° Xingqitian wo gén mang means that | am/will be even busier on Sunday than normally. In this lesson, we will introduce sentences in which % is used with tt comparison. O HRA? HTFLWESA eo O FFtk#ES > O ABGTRALBNALH% Structures: % is an adverb that modifies state verbs and is thus placed in front of state verbs. fp Questions: The x % x pattern is typically used in this structure. O SPRHMRAAFALERHBEA? O EFREMAFALERELE ? 309————— FKPRREI . Describe the following situations using the comparison : even more so with —KERZS HFRS > | —RRMRBZR-FLAE+RBR: L lo T et A A ( 8A Boe, 7 Soe + Ah FH 35000 ARSE PX > 4 #52000 ARES PX © RETSEFMPR? RAMABT OREM PR BRELKERAOIPS MHL AS BES I ° ee = 7 © © 000 ( \ 7 x V. Inferior Comparison (24 méi you::: rs Function: The A 72 4 B Af f& / 3 /#--- pattern is used to compare two things A & B and is used to indicate that A is not as (adjective) as B. TTRACEME ® ° KBR HAR ER RAY P RLARA SL Gp 04 APB ER DR RA FT AGS EEO SHE UR A) HE CL AR BAF Ma RA BRARA LRA ABET Ie O90000 Structures: Note that this pattern is usually used in the negative, 7 ( # ) méi (you). Sometimes, #8 /# name or 3% J zhé can be omitted. Its positive counterpart, “A # you B ARE name/ 3% fF zhé state verb”, is rarely used, except in 2% questions. 310LESSON 74° KARE ! Lie ett SF Questions: The A-not-A pattern is used for questions. O HARA RA EER? O BHF BAARASILOMER ? O AAMLHEA RA SB HY AP ER ? O RRHRAMARKAR OAR ? Usage: This pattern indicates that A is not as (adjective) as B. When A and B are the same, use the “equal degree” pattern introduced in Lesson 13, ‘A #R gén B — tk yivang...’. The pattern for “superior degree”, ‘A tb biB-::’ was introduced in Lesson 8. When you ask a question like 4 & F i& A HE RAK ? Is today as hot as yesterday? It is assumed that yesterday was quite hot. Three different responses to the question are possible as shown below: e AR IRVER— AR aR © (equal degree ) O FRA UE RAL BX © (inferior degree ) @O FA weRA © (superior degree ) & 4} Exercise Answer the questions given using the A ‘24 B Ap / 2 /#--- pattern. [El Tap Fo Fo He > HELL ? TT RA Hs ts ABE SIb Fee > MAL RY ? B MNFo ER > MASA ALR ? DEE BHF BRE FAY HF ? myo ke > Ue REA AEH ? ©0000 311* I. II. 312 Ap XR I eM em ae Time-Duration after verbal 7 le Function: @ Mama de péng zai  wanle san tian. 8 Laoshi zai  zhule yi nian. 8 yi ge yue. Structures: 1. (1) Ta zi fangzi zile ban nian. (2) Ta zhu  zhule san nian. 2. (1) Fangzi ta zhi ziile ban nian. (2)  ta zhi zhule san nian. _# Questions: @ Na jian fangzi ni ziile yi nian ban ma? © Ni shibushi zai zhé dé yi ge zhongtou? ©  Laoban qinian shibishi zai  zhule ban nian? Completion-to-date with Double 7 le Function: Ta yijing zai Taiwan wanle yi nian le.   zai  zhule wit nian le. W6 gongzudle liang ge yu le.  jian fangzi, ta yijing ziile ban nian le. oo 8 ° © Tamen xué Zhongwen xué sin ge xingqi le. Grammar Examples in Pinyin and English ° Function: o 8 8 My mom’s friend visited Taipei for three days (and went back home.) Our teacher stayed in the US for a year. Miss. Li worked in the language center for one month (and left). Structures: 1 (1) He rented the house for half a year. (2) He lived in Taipei for three years. 2. (1) He rented the house for only half a year. (2) He lived in Taipei for only three years. _/ Questions: 8 8 Did you rent that house for one and a half years? You waited here for an hour, right? The Boss Chen stayed in New York for half a year last year, right? Function: oo © 0O She has already been in Taiwan for a year. Miss Chen has lived in the US for five years. I’ve been working for two months. He has been renting this house for half a year. They have studied Chinese for three weeks now.III. # kuai--: f le about to Function: @ Kuai xidyi le. @ Dianying yao jié le. aba kuai yao dao jia le. Ee oe Structures: _/ Questions: 1 mama de shéng kuai daole ma’? Ni de shéng kuai daol ? © Bisai yao kaishile ma? ©  de nii péng kuai yao hui Faguo le ma? IV. Comparison & gé even more so Function: @ Ti hén gio, ta gé bi ta gén gao. © Jinnian bi qinian gén léng © W6 jué manggud bi xigua gén haochi. Structures: J Questions: @  ci de tai shibishi bi shang ci de gén da? @® Zai xué shangwang shibishi bi zai jia li geng kuai? LESSON ¢74°RABE ! Function: @ It’s going to rain soon. © The movie is about to finish. © Dad is almost home. Structures: _# Questions: @ Is your mom’s birthday coming soon? © Is the game about to start? © Is brother’s girlfriend going back to France soon? Function: @ He is very tall. His brother is even taller than him. © This year is even colder than last year. (Last year was already very cold.) © [think mangos are even more delicious than watermelons. (Watermelons are (very) delicious as everyone knows.) Structures: F Questions: © 1s this typhoon bigger than the one last time? © Is the internet at school even faster than at home? 313———* $RPRR#1 V. Inferior Comparison with :2 4 --- méi you:': Function:  méi yé baba name gao.  méi ydu  name kuai. W6 de Zhongwen méi you laoshi de name hao. Chou doufti méi you nitirou mian zhé haocht. Tiandian méi you xidolongbao name hao Zuo. Zhe ci de taifeng méi you shang ci de name ké © 0 0 O 06 Structures: J Questions: @  you méi ydu jisjie name piaoliang? Hualian de fangzii you méi you  de name gui?  de gongzuo you méi you  de name nan zhao? Xiatian de tiangi y6u méi you chintian de shift? 600 8 Usage: @ Jintian gén zu6tian yiyang  © Jintiin méi you zuctian name re. © Jintian bi zudtian re. 314 Function: ©0006 8 06 My older brother is not as tall as my dad. The train is not as fast as the High Speed Rail. My Chinese is not as good as my teacher’s. The stinky tofu is not as good as the beef noodles. Desserts are not as easy to make as xiaolongbao. This typhoon is not as scary as the last one. JF Questions: @ Is the younger sister as pretty as the older sister? @ Is rent in Hualien as expensive as in Taipei? © Ate jobs in Japan as hard to find as in the US? @ Is the weather in the summer as pleasant as that in the spring? Usage: oe 8 9 Today is as hot as yesterday. Today is not as hot as yesterday. Today is hotter than yesterday.LESSON 7 4° KASEY |! It’s So Cold! ae) | S SS ee. I. The Four Seasons Goal: Learning to describe the four seasons and explain why one likes or dislikes them. Task: Tell the class about the climate of your home country. Which season do you like the most and the least. Why? apes) 4 HRA O hERARS? 3% 2 A? (BA PRIA) se O hSRERRS? © KERKRS? se O KERARS? Mode Ne de Ne ae ated tetas as 315SRP RRA 1 II. How Long Did You Live There? Goal: Learning to make simple statemenst about your experiences. Task: Ask your classmates where they have lived, and how long they lived in each place. Record your findings and report to the class. E.g., KR _ BHA (TSA? kA BHF {ET mA (7) ° Fo = = = = = a ¢ bay FB AAA A a SS _E i Shanghai ies — ##% London a 7 AA al 295 =| @ fo ET ° = eo ET ° SF 96 tt fT ° = 0 te ET °LESSON «7 4eRKRABE ! It’s So Cold! III. Temperature Comparison Goal: Learning to make comparisons between events. Task: Compare the average temperatures of Taipei in the various seasons of last year and this year. Use the patterns tb » @ > Lb#R + Hoes @ + BR HRY RK # ++: ABE introduced earlier. KE SE & 25°C 25°C B 36°C 38°C #K 21°C 20°C A 12°C 10°C 24: (C=FE du (degrees Celsius ) IV. Same Weathers Goal: Learning to compare weather conditions. Task: You learned during the first activity what the climate for each of your classmate’s country is like. Please compare the climate of one classmate’s home country with that of yours. Ask for more information and write the results on the chart below. | é , SS ALHRWRA ABA RH RA tr SEAR? oS FRY RA! 317————* RP XR1 SLL PLAS 1 PD lk ID PLS IPD ACARWRA FB RAY AA “> aS Gr Bt ? an BRRWAF ’ Gr BAR ? an FRA WR A ’ Gr KRW RA EBA ? ERE 2 eRET ES? 318LESSON © 74°KABE ! It’s So Cold! V. Summer in Taiwan Goal: Learning to discuss events and activities in summer. Task: Discuss with a classmate and write down your findings in Chinese. ao ie er in Taiwan BR FM FB ee Be BI RR BAR PLA ARR eH S 319———* $A? xRe1 St Bits of Chinese Culture | Typhoon Days-Off “Typhoon days” are breaks from school and work that are announced when a typhoon with average wind speeds of class 7 or higher or gusts of class 10 or higher is expected to pass through an area sometime within the next four hours. School and work are cancelled until the storm passes. Typhoons bring strong winds and heavy rains and the power to decide to cancel work and school was given to the Directorate-General of Personnel Administration 4 Typhoon satellite image in 1993. The DGPA took into consideration weather BERR | PRARE forecasts from the Central Weather Bureau and suggestions from local governments when deciding whether or not to announce national-wide typhoon days. Today, the DGPA does not decide for the entire nation; instead the decision has been vested to regional governments. To find out whether work and school will be cancelled for a storm, check with the local news or DGPA’s official website at http://www.cpa.gov.tw/ or call 020-300-166 for updates. # pn Lv “Damage from a typhoon caused .. Taking precautions against a CHAR) Hevee / HY (HARM) BBE / HR typhoon (BGR) BIE / HEY 320LESSON «7 fe RABE ! It’s So Cold! ommee aa 5 NICO eee I can talk about weather conditions, including typhoons. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can describe the four seasons and explain why I like or dislike them. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% a enaeermaamena I can compare events. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% TT I can make simple statements about experiences, e.g., trips. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 321+B AAR A SPAR I Don’t Feel Well & 8 @ 4% Learning Objectives Topic: 4 4 Falling Sick + Learning to ask someone how they are feeling. + Learning to describe symptoms in simple terms. + Learning to give suggestions to somebody who is sick. + Learning to reject or accept suggestions.He— Dialogue i eM pe ig 8 I Don’t Feel Well 15-1 324 RR MR RO > By) 4h > HRARAR ASFA ? : R- BRR SRI HORA H ER PB AR AR ABT © > KBSZAT ? >: OH. RAT © > RA A UR ARM ° RE BLAE Ko > MRAM AH BM ? : RA BERR RE > BIBRA EMT ° : MPRA Be > Ro Re RHESR oLESSON 75 © RAR HF AR id al ers Bel 4o Eo: HAO o PR ADH BE St ? Ss 4: Mee RLT > SBkK SHE? HB ae > FRR RL EF fo Bs A BET ee easubatnytn Yisheng : Bai  ni nali bu shift? Rayt : W6 yizhi lid bishui, tou hén tong, weik6u hén cha.  dongxi dou bu xiang chi.  : Dagai duo jit le? Rayt : Yijing si, wutian le. Yisheng : W6 kankan ni de houlong. Houlong you yidian fayan. Rayt :   shéng de shi shén bing? Yisheng : Ni you yidian fashao, shi ganmao, buguo méi you shén guanxi. Rayt :  w6 dé chi yao ma?  : Yao, ni dao yaoju qu na yao. Rtiyt : Haode.   de bing shén shihou hui hao? Yisheng : Huiqu ba yao chile, dud hé shui, duo xitixi, zio yidian shuijiao, hén kuai jit hui hao. Rayu : Haode, xié nin. Oe Osean : Miss Bai, how are you doing? (Where are you feeling poorly?) : My nose continues to run, my head aches, and my appetite is poor. I don’t feel like eating anything. : About how long? : About four or five days now. 325ERP RRL Doctor : Let me take a look at your throat. Your throat is a bit inflamed. Ruyu : Excuse me, what sickness do I have? Doctor _: Youhavea slight fever. It is a cold, but it’s nothing serious. Ruyu : Excuse me, do I have to take any medicine? Doctor : Yes. Go to the pharmacy to pick up your medicine. Ruyu : Thank you. Excuse me, when will I be well again? Doctor — : Go home, take your medicine, drink plenty of water, get plenty of rest, and go to bed early and you’ll be better very soon. Ruyu : Fine, thank you. Ceo Rem Cec aa | \ 15-2 Vocabulary 1 Bye yi -? (N) doctor 2 — yizhi aang (Adv) continuously, all the way 3 Ot lit 2 (Vv) to flow 4 oR bishui 2% (N) eaingnose ‘ 5 5B tou & (N) head 6 Be tong XR (Vs) painful 7 gu wéi XR (N) appetite 8 z cha ci (Vs) poor, bad 9 oe houlong LR (N) throat 10 FR fayan red (Vp-sep) to be inflamed 11 4A shéng a, (p-sep) to fall ill 12 % yea fashao a (Vp-sep) to have a fever 133 AE ganmao & Bs (Vp) to catch/have a cold 14 ae yao FR (N) medicine 15 Be Fy yaoju Ba (N) pharmacy, drug store 16 es na a (V) to get 326LESSON ¢7 5° RRA SFR 1 Don't Feel Well 17. 4B ba ye (Ptc) disposal marker 18 2k shui u (N) water 19 tk A, xitixi : LU (Vi) to take a rest 20 «BE - shuijiao & a (V-sep) to sleep Phrases 21 #—Be zo yidian wo z, a bit earlier Skee Dera Ce N 4o Zi REBT ORERBRE - & ) > BRAM LALFIRACPAR UCT RG Mek > Bok THE Bre 4o Bt MRS RAPA RRA A > HEAR? KZ Ft RAT RESB AA ERR ° 327ERP RR 4o Eo: ARR > RRA ARE Pos o AAD SE {RAF > HP EMRE © ef): Bbithek ¢ RMB ABR Te 4o z: BROKE BBG ? = @ : RBMRAB WIRE ORR > MAT? AR AE EER © 4o Been han Deere ee Rl) oz, ° gz @ : Behe ay Hes ° ( ko BF BRA ) do ER: RRART ee ee & f@) : Mater 3¢S To Ree — aM Buey> web BE RAF © ho: Ree RR T RAB 5 Bar 0 SEA A > Bite he & be FEWEST ° 54:4 Gis BS Mca lim atinyil Ruayu Antong Ruyu Antong Ruyt Antong Ruyt Antong XX 328 : Ni zé le?  zhé nankan. : Zudtian wanshang duzi hén bu shifu, chile dongxi jit th, hai tule hao ji ci. : Ni zhé bu shifu, w6 péi ni qu kanbing, hao bt hao? : Buyong le. Wo zai Taiwan méi you jiankang baoxian. : Name, wo6 péi ni qu xué de jiankang zhongxin. Nali de yi hén hao, dui :  ni. W6 xiang qu yaoju mai yao jit hao le. : Ni zhé bu qu kanbing ma? : W6 xiang hui jia xitixi. Qing ni gén ldosht shud, w6 shéng le, bu néng xué yé hén ké shangke.LESSON ¢ 75 ¢ &4R A AFAR 1 Don’t Feel Well Ray : Hao. Ni ziji yao dud xidoxin.  de, bing de dingxi zuihado dou bié chi. Antong :  ni de guanxin. [Riyt xiake yihou] Ray : W6 lai kan ni le. Xianzai jué zenmeyang? Hao yidian le ma? Antong :  ni, hdo dud le. W6 chile yi bao yao yihou, shui de bi zudtian hao. Rayt : Bucuo. Ni shuile ji ge xiaoshi de jiao yihou, xianzai li bi zaoshang hao de duG le. MrerscrerD Ruyu : What’s the matter? You don’t look too good. Antong : My stomach didn’t feel good last night. I ate something and then threw up. I vomited several times. Ruyu : You’re feeling that badly. I'll go with you to see a doctor. Okay? Antong —: No need. I don’t have health insurance in Taiwan. Ruyu : Then I'll go with you to the school’s health center. The doctors there are good, and they are polite to students. Antong : Thank you. I think I’ll just buy some medicine at a drug store. That should do it. Ruyu : You’re really not going to see a doctor? Antong —: [just want to go home and rest. Please tell the teacher I am sick and I can’t go to class. Ruyu : Take care of yourself. You’d best not eat anything oily or cold. Antong : Thank you for your concern. [after Ruyu gets out of class] Ruyu : ITcame to see you. How are you feeling now? Any better? Antong =: Thanks. Much better now. I took a packet of medicine and slept a lot better than yesterday. Ruyu : Good. After having slept for a few hours, you now look much better than this morning. 329————— FKP RR 1 39 = Vocabulary 1 \Y 15-4 Vocabulary a person’s “color” (said of 1 Ae li 3 es (N) the face when healthy or sick, pleased or angry etc.) 2 A nankan 2 3s (Vs) not to look good 3 ALF duzi a P (N) stomach, abdomen 4 oh th EN (Vv) to throw up, to vomit 5 & ji He (N) (a) few 6 ok ci - (M) measure word for times, 7 [at péi & (Vv) ° on ie somebody, A JA kanbing 3 2 (V-sep) to see a doctor 48 BE jiankang a (N) health 10 4% baoxian oes (N) insurance 11 gk gén £ (Prep) to 12 wh you x (Vs) oily, greasy 13. ok bing 2 (Vs) icy 14 fl bié Z (Adv) don’t (used in imperatives) 15 As guanxin s z (Vst) to be concerned about i @ mo Fay ME WO Fras 17 shui KR (Vi) to sleep 18»). ag xidoshi zh a (N) hour Phrases 19 © fT zé le eee What’s wrong? 20 ART buyong le Cae It’s not necessary. 21 fear ME ES health center 330LESSON ¢ 75 ¢ RAR TAF 1 Don’t Feel Well 22 BR hui jia Ks go home 7 It would be best.../ (You) fe ay NG 23 RAF zuihao RL should... I. Non-committal Stance with Question Words re 4 Function: When question words (e.g., + /# shén 47 dudshdo, # ji, ABA ndli, t+ Eka shén difang, # shé ++ JE AR shén shihou ) occur in a declarative sentence, the sentence indicates a non-committal attitude on the part of the speaker who is avoiding giving a clear answer. Non-committal statements are always in the negative. QO RRAZYVRe O WRA KIM RK ° O KHOR ERAHEM >: CO RRAMB > O HFHERHEe O AHRRRRLA EH - eo ) Answer the question using with question words indicating a non-committal ee rf Ask 4 Answer O Hh faa AS bs ? RADY BR ° O BARAT MHRA MMR? KR '® O BEATE? 9 ee” O KREEBARSMAB? R 8 O Re RABAAER THE RMA RE? 331+ FAP RRB II. To Dispose of Something with ¢e ba / Function: This pattern is generally referred to as 4 bd or disposal construction . It consists of a variety of internal elements and is quite similar to the phrase “take this (noun) and...” in English, but much more widely used. We begin with the most basic structure, which refers to how a noun, object of the action verb, is disposed of by the subject. @ Rie+ANM@ TT O HieRH HHT - O #RTWETtET: Structures: jz ba + object + verb + 7 /e, in which the object is in most cases definite in reference (bare nouns, or nouns with modifiers such as 22 14, ABA, tt 4, etc.), the verb (bare, i.e., just one character) must be an outward transitive action verb (action away from the actor, not inward towards the actor), and sentence must end with the particle [ . J Negation: The negation uses ‘& or ¥'] occurs in front of the ee 4@, bd. oe tweet ° O sNieKa B-~% 8 thigiee & BR J Questions: Q %eARET RA? O RAF RUCHKBET? O RAF Hie FT ? Usage: 1. As mentioned above, the object of #2 bd must be definite. (1) RRIF MRT - (2) RBIMA FRA To *RMI— XR FIRAT 2. As also mentioned earlier, the bare verb in 42 bd sentences must be outward and transitive. They include # mdi, °% chi, % hé & xié but not such inward verbs as B mdi, xué You cannot say *#JeEPRET . 332LESSON ¢ 75 ¢ RRA SPAR Bia eo Bo » 6 3. The notion “dispose of” is often indicated using “do-with”, “do-to”, and “take (noun) and (verb)” in English, e.g., “What he did with his car was to sell it” or “He took his car and sold it.” 5S Bee Ceci) According to the pictures below, what did the individuals do with the coffee, book, xiaolongbao, beef noodles, and motorcycle? III. V J le---#t jit’: do...right after doing... + tage ’ Function: The pattern “V 7 ---#t--” indicates that event 2 occurs right after the completion of event 1. QO BRKT RRARIT O ee T Hwa K - O EH TKR TARA ° Structures: The two events can be in the affirmative or negative. @ #317 Bsb> RH Htb 101 FF ° O ke T-—mAwm’ RRRAET ° © wwct RAH TRAP 333© ERP URE 1 J Questions: The A-not-A form is not possible. Either "% ma or 7&7 x shibushi can be used to form questions. O HFT D> REZ yygy ? ORRRRARE THR RK KIVGRK? O HAAREBART ROB RABORT ? Usage: The “V 7 ---#t---” pattern taught in this lesson is similar to the “—---#” in Lesson 13, but differs as explained below: 1. The “ —” is followed by a relatively short verbal phrase, e.g, — HH 2 #i-- and — 4 #£--:, to emphasize the immediate succession of the two actions. In contrast, the “V f” pattern is not as restricted in terms of what can follow it. 2. “a4” can be used with “V J ---#b---”, but it cannot with the “— --- 3” pattern. fare, T UAB > PLABE Bo *hh— ve, T BUR > PLE RET © Complete the following dialogues using the V 7 ---#%--- pattern. O A! MH EB RHE F 4 ? Br’ (37 ak ) O A: RH BET AG RR B: ° rb 3 ? CRA RER ) © A: RH BREA AMT? B: ° (BAB) © A: te BRR ER? OB: ° Ct? & ) O A: tht Bape BR ? B: : (Aa) 334LESSON ¢ 7D ¢ RAR GSFAR Bia re BC] IV. —25 yidian a bit ts Function: The combination — 25 yididn indicates a minimal quantity or degree. eo 4°] TJ — Bb ujoek o @ B—-BRADT > O kw Bc — BWR o Structures: — 25 yididn can appear in a variety of structures as illustrated below. 1. —85+ NP: Before a noun as its modifier. (1) Wee AST RT EBRD (2) RAT BE SRR ° (3) FATE T —Bbw ° 2.Vs+ —#5 : After a state verb as its modifier, it indicates comparison, as in “a little more/less...”. (1) th tb F&F #E — Bb o (2) RF — Bb R ! (3) FAR RS we — BE R 3. ® (— ) 85+ Vs: Before a state verb but preceded by 4 as a modifier of the adjective, it doesn’t indicate comparison. (1) 4+ A 4a — Bb3R © (2) #2 > RRA—-BF eo (3) RFRA BE (4) #2 (—) Bh ABBE ° Usage: — 25 can be reduplicated to form — 24 25, indicating that something is “just a tiny bit”, e.g., #&R B—8bBb ° WO zhi yao yidiandian. “I just want a little bit.” Complete the sentences below using the minimal quantity expression — 25 . (BEENE| @eROADT > Ra ees SRB O A: KAR > "CART IRA? BiAR (HGH) © @ #RAEAT > mst (BE HE) 335———« FKP RRe1 O SATFAERIOR > AMARA WEE MERE (F) FR? O RAKEABRLE Ss (HY) D> Complete the sentences below using — 25 yididn, 4 — 25 yOu yididn, or 4 dud / 2 shé V —3 yidian. MeO AR OM T +1SE 5A > 4G RARE T > RR SRAEAESE? BEAR BRK FR RD e RAPA Vee SEHR RLAFR RE RMhe me RGR CHR) > RAMM © oe °e 8 3° 8 oe oO V. Comparing Actions with a 47 de Complement Function: This pattern compares actions. QO FTF AMI IH HF ° © 218 F 1K NAF LAE Structures: The pattern is called “comparative adverbial”. The pattern comes in a variety of sub-patterns as illustrated below. 1. Comparative + Action + ## + State (1) AEE AR BAEIR © (2) FEL AAT IR ° (3) He He LLP SAGES © 2. Action + ## + Comparative + State (verb repeated) (1) EKER LAT Eb BE (2) RASS AAT LEAK © (3) Fe Fo BSBA TH ° 336LESSON ¢ 75 ¢ RRA AFAR 1 Don't Feel Well Pattern 2 above is used most frequently. F Negation: The negation marker # precedes tk . OD MARA LR BEI ° O HB RAMA © O PARENT TH ° J Questions: O RAR BAF LYS EH O HAF REKBEB LMR ? © 2 PHMRHA LATS? BPN e actions using 44 de and complete the following sentences. eal BSE Hp 2 RB HL — (EB BAAS PSO BR B+ A 4b BE — 1058 Gat bb sate O wit SART-Gaitk: A Ropers BRA SRATATOR- ——— @ F#FETTAMFEA > SF SE EEFEE T HAA ° EE © LBA KIV SST RR MARA KIVA iS (AA 4 KTV SKY T v9 148 ee O WH ABARIRI MAMA WBE Ro+ 74 ° A tb ° 4A 4A B+ 48% © 337——- $ApxRe1 VI. Complements of Degree in Comparison Structures /€HEee Function: Degrees can be presented either as a pre-verbal adverbial, or as post- verbal complement. In this lesson, we focus on the latter type, ... — 2b yidian » -+-4 % deduo’? $F dudle. @ (HF Rt RA A— BE O PSs LAB GS - O ARGH LF LAARS T Structures: J Questions: O FTFRARLHHAZ—B? O mye eB? © ARAMA RAR RAFIRG S ? O BMARLK#R#HSTS? vy) ones Answer the questions below using — 25 yididn » 44 % de dud and % T dud le in the complements. fe] Ask 4 Answer IBS| SRLAS Rs ? BERL AB RES / RS T° @ BAreRrs? O Rf wp tet RH ? (#F] ) O SHA EHRERBARP HRA? O HAF HIRAI RS ? ( 4h4k ) 338LESSON ¢ 75° RRA AFAR 1 Don’t Feel Well VII. Separable Verbs re Function: This is a special category of verbs. The inherent structure of most separable verbs is [V+N]. The V and N can be separated and an element inserted in between them. The separated V and N behave like a verb and object. Examples of separable verbs are: "33, EXE, E44), L2R, AH ER. AZ. SELES, vk, BR4A , "CPR, HR, Structures: Basically, there are three types of separable forms. Let’s take the words introduced in this volume as examples. 1. J inserted. The { is the Verbal f here. (1) ET RUKH? MHL ° (2) RAE RF T RRIRAKRKGEH ° 2. Object inserted. Object refers to the recipient of an action. (1) 28 UR — f° (2) #078 7 (R—SRAA © 3. Time-Duration insterted. (1) BeAr} AL -\1E1SE BA HO BE (2) AR APS AH FE 9 BFR > AR HAR? (3) #6°B TS) apa > ABER © | RB eee Separate the elements V and N below, and then insert something in between them to form good sentences. QO 4% > BTZbHHE > ATRANE "BK > Lge +44 +3 & Fi VvvVY 8 339oSRPRRE1 @ se Ce BRR Ra 48 Lb > > > > > > > > I. Non-committal Stance with Question Words Function: O Wo  ydu dudshao qian. Ta méi you ji ge péng Ni de ginmao méi yé shén guanxi. W6 méi qu nali. Ta bu dasuan mai shén W6 zuotian méi gén shé qu kan dianying. OO00 II. To Dispose of Something with de ba . Function: @ W6 bi nirou mian chi le. © 74 ba wo de tang hé le. © Fangdong ba fangzi mai le. 340 Function: @ [don't really have all that much money. She doesn’t really have all that many friends. Your cold really isn’t all that serious. I didn’t really go anywhere. He is not going to buy anything. I really didn’t go with anyone to see a movie yesterday. 0000 Function: @ [ate the beef noodles. (I took the beef noodles and ate them.) © He drank my soup. © The landlord sold the house.1Don’t Feel Well ; Structures: J Negation: @ Wo méi ba zhijido mianxian chi le. ©  ba  de yao chi le. © 14 méi ba shi mai le. J Questions: @ Ni bi  xié méi ydu? @ Ni shibishi ba  mai le? © Ni shibishi ba ta de zdofan chi le? Usage: 1. (1) W6 xiang ba shouji mai le. (2) W6 xiang ba na zhi shé mai le. INL. V 7 le 38 ja Function: © Wo fangle jia jid qu lixing. © Ta chile yao jit shuijiao. © Baba huile jia jit hé liang bei Wiilong cha. do...right after doing... Structures: @ 14 daole  jit qu  101 kankan. ©  hé yi wan  tang, jit bd jué léng le. © Jigjie chile chou doufit, dizi jit ba shifa. ‘ F Questions: @ Tamen jianle mian, jit qu hé  ma? © Ni didi shibtshi xiale ké jit qu KTV  Ta shibtshi qu  wanle lian q y' ig ge xingqi, jiu bu xiang huilai le? LESSON ¢ 73 ¢ RRA AFAR Structures: ; ~ Negation: @ I didn’t eat the pork knuckles with fine noodles. © Don’t take my medicine. © He didn’t sell the book. ff Questions: @ Have you finished your homework? © You sold the motorcycle, right? © You ate his breakfast, right? Usage: 1. (1) I want to sell my mobile phone. (2) I want to sell that mobile phon Function: @ I went on break (my break started) and I went traveling. © He took medicine and went to sleep. © Dad got home and drank two cups of Oolong tea. Structures: @ He arrived in Taipei and checked out Taipei 101. © My little sister stopped feeling cold right after she had a bowl of hot soup. © Sister ate stinky tofu then her stomach started acting up. . Zp Questions: @ Did they go to drink coffee after they met? © Your brother went to KTV to sing af ter class, right? © He visited New York for two weeks and didn’t want to come back, right? 341————e $KPRRE1 Usage: 2. Ta chile yao yihou, jit qu shuijido. IV. —#5 yidian a bit Function: @ Ta hé yidiain  ©  yidian qian tai shio le. © 13 yao chi yidian mianxian. Structures: 1. (1) Ta zai chaoshi maile yidian dongxi. (2) W6 zhi hé yidian Wulong cha. (3) Zudtian xiale yidian yu. 2. (1) Ta biw6 nianqing yidian. (2) Qing nizao yidian lai! (3) Mingtian w6 hui wan yidian hui jia. 3. (1) Nitrou mian you yidian 1a. (2) Zheli, dongtian ydu yidian léng (3) Zhe zhi sh6uji you yidian gui. (4) Ta you (yi) dian xiang shui. Usage: 2. After he took his medicine, he went to bed. Function: @ He drank a little coffee. © This tiny amount of money is too little. © She wants to eat a little bit of fine noodles. Structures: 1. (1) She bought some things at the supermarket. (2) I only drank a little Oolong tea. (3) It rained a little yesterday. 2. (1) Heisa little bit younger than I am. (2) Please arrive a little early. (3) Pl be home a little later tomorrow. 3. (1) The beef noodles is a little spicy. (2) Here, the winters are a bit cold. (3) This cell phone is a little expensive. (4) He is a little sleepy. V. Comparing Actions with a 77 de Complement Function: @  chi nitrou mian chi de bi didi dud. ©  zhong shduji mai de bi na zhdng hao. Structures: 1. (1) Ta bi w6 zud de kuai. (2) Wo bi ta zdu de kuai. (3) Didi bi gé nian de hao. 2. (1) Ta zudfan zud de biw6 kuai. (2) W6 zoult zou de bi ta kuai. (3) Didi nianshi nian de bi gé hao. 342 Function: @ The older brother eats more beef noodles than the younger brother. © This type of cell phone sells better than that type. Structures: 1. (1) He does it faster than I do. (2) I walk faster than he does. (3) The younger brother studies better than (is a better student than) his older brother. 2. (1) He cooks faster than I do. (2) I walk faster than he does. (3) The younger brother studies better than his older brother.Pada te AC J Negation: @ Ta zudfan bi bi w6 zud de kuai. @ Zbula, wo bi bi ta zou de kuai. © Didi nianshii nian de bu bi gé hao. ; J Questions: @ Ni zudfan zud de bi mama hao ma? @® Ta shibishi zdulii zou de bi ni kuai? © Didi di wanggqit da de bi gé hao ma? LESSON ¢ 75 ¢ RRA AFAR pf Negation: @ He doesn’t cook faster than I do. @® 1 don’t walk faster than he does. © The younger brother doesn’t study better than his older brother. J Questions: @ Do you cook better than Mom? @® Does he walk faster than you do? © Does the younger brother play tennis better than the older brother? VI. Complements of Degree in Comparison Structures Function: @ Tide fangjidn bi wo de da yidian. @  bi  yuan de dud. © Wo jude wanshang bi zdoshang shift dud le. Structures: J Questions: @  shibishi bi didi gio yidian? Fangzii ké pianyi yidian ma? Chiantian qu ltixing shibushi bi xiatian shift de dud?  piao bi hu pido gui dud le ma? © 00 Function: @ His room is just a little bigger than mine. © The MRT station is much farther away than the bus stop. © [ think evenings are a lot more comfortable than mornings. Structures: J Questions: @ Is the older brother a bit taller than his younger brother? Can the rent be a little cheaper? It is much more enjoyable (lit. comfortable) to travel in the spring than in the summer, isn’t it? Are HSR tickets much more expensive than train tickets? o o80 343+ $A PRRe1 VII. Separable Verbs Structures: Structures: 1. (1) Ta huile jia yihou, jit kaishi gongzuo. 1. (1) He started working after he got home. (2) W6 zuotian xiale ke jit gén péng qt kan dianying. 2. (1) W6 xiang jian ni yi mian. 2. (2) Ta zhaole ni yi zhang xiang. 3. (1) Women méi tian shang ba ge zhongtou 3. de ban. (2) Nimen xinnian de shihou, fang ji tian de jia? (3) Ta changle san xiaoshi de gé you yidian lei. 344 (2) I went to see a movie with friends after class yesterday. (1) I want to meet with you once. (2) He took a picture of you. (1) We work eight hours a day. (2) How many days do you get off for New Year’s? (3) He sang for three hours and is a little tired.LESSON ¢ 73 ° RRA PAR Uta co AC) I. Let’s Compare Goal: Learning to make comparisons of varying degrees. Task: The following four students are learning Chinese in Taipei. They always eat together and go out together, but they don’t live together. Please compare the four individuals using the questions in the column on the far left. KARR aR mE 8 F $8 Fe AB NT $ 18,000 NT $ 6,500 NT $ 15,000 NT $ 6,200 ey RR teen NEE Ks he aaa SREB HR (See nop) Comme et) (Ampeg) (CR LS w+ 4-48 ) 1. "OBRAR (1) PO AR FF tb 1% AF ° (2) ARF HL ° (3) 40 BOAT rhe PS ° 2. fa (1) HAW fo 4o FB fo He (2) REO RBRA Tee Pare a wpa sfarbARH — (3) 4 RA) FB 4a th AAA Bo 345———- 2K PRRe1 3. SHESaR (1) RRR / BPR CC (2) EPS B / AAA ° (3) OBB KB / VHRR ° II. Who Is Taking Care of Me? Goal: Learning to ask how someone is feeling and giving suggestions to somebody who is sick. Task 1: Play the roles A and B below with a classmate and write down your conversation. [El At REET ? Bi: RRB Ro At MRK / Het a (Am. SHE» BRE. SB) Bi: &¢09 > BAR YB © # BAA RSC FF ERE 0G ( ) & 3Z 2& Asreeing to a suggestion ) A: E> REBT ? Big 346LESSON ¢ 75 ¢ RiRH4FAR 1 Don't Feel Well A? RIB / RAF ° B: 3FA9 © 0 (fA 3 32 3H, Agreeing to a suggestion ) AlN PR? MEET ? B: # RIB / BHF Bi: Bair ° e ( 4B 28,32 3& Refusing a suggestion ) - EAE? REBT ? : . ° MRA / BH : shines thes eo ane Task 2: Role-play asa patient. You vomited after dinner last night, and your stomach is upset. You go see a doctor. Your partner is to role-play as the doctor. Describe your symptoms to the doctor. The doctor is to then give some advice. II. Taking Medication Goal: Learning to read the instructions on prescriptions. Task: Look at the prescription below and ask the following three questions. ew ( tae SHR -RLKK? sats 8 + FE BRE ee, °? aoe ee © #HFKaR? 347IV. 348 oSRPXRE IL Use #2 Construction Goal: Learning to use the disposal construction 42 . Task: Form groups of two and ask each group to complete the following dialogues based on the pictures provided. @O A: Arik! RIMSAR-HB 350A) = dw B: 4% > RA RRB @ A: BAR FRHWR____ oT? PET LAK GT BRR © B: AMT @ A: #_ KHBR_ TF? Bi HAR RAK RA © How Are You Feeling? Goal: Learning to talk about having a cold. Task: Your friend 40 % is sick at home. Call her and find out how she is feeling. Ask also four questions about her condition. o0o00LESSON ¢ 75 ¢ RRA AFAR 1 Don't Feel Well Wearing Surgical Masks You see people wearing surgical masks. Are they ill? Probably not. People in Taiwan wear surgical masks as a preventative measure among other reasons. When the seasons are changing, it is easy to catch a cold and since colds are transmitted via the respiratory system, wearing a mask on crowded public buses or the MRT can help prevent transmission. During the winter months, people on scooters wear masks to stay warm and also to filter out air pollution. Servers in restaurants wear masks to keep particles from unintentionally landing in food. Hospital workers and patients wear masks to prevent viral infections. People often wear surgical masks to help stay healthy and help prevent transmission of diseases. Wearing surgical masks in MRT stations Wearing surgical masks in the hospital (BARR) BAA / HY 349———— KP XRE1 aS D —— am Self-Assessment Checklist I can ask someone how they are feeling. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% A I can describe symptoms in simple terms. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% I can make suggestions to somebody who is sick. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% TD I can politely accept or reject suggestions. 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% — 350ba baba bai Bai Raya ban bang bangqiu bao baoxian baozi  bi bianli shangdian bié bijiao bing bisai bishui bomti bu bu hao bu xing bubi ké bucud bugud buhao yisi  Fy Apa oF Apa $k 3 7B, ne °e, ne 42 E BE Ee a AL B40 % on as am ~ 8 co HER HED a @ TRE PR at ay a * i HG bk ALTE LARA at] Hl re Lee a VJ bE Lee HR Shak 46 {ARE AE AE AT NAT Fb B RD A AN ti Aid Ait APES PR ABR REA 3-1-21 13-1-4 10-2-9 buyong le e cai canguan canting e B e B a < & 5 2 a oshi 0 2 hén  2 é 2 Epiao cht ichikan 2 chifan chou doufti chuan 2 uanghu 2 uantong 2 tifing chintian chaqu ci cong oO da da da bifen da dianhua Da’an dagai KAY aT ES KE A AK OAK Se me WD Oe aS > & ma ik iii PRA west ‘ER We NONE NE AGB F ap (eB BR thas 1K UN iT KB Fy Hit KE KG P - 3 Vocabulary Index (Chinese-English) SR ee eee eee OEE E THERE EHH O RHEE ERE EOE ERE OEE E ES -15-2-20 3-2-16 8-2-2 §-2-2 1-2-3 15-1-8 8-2-14 9-2-12 3-1-10 7-1-3 1-1-8 {21-4 12-1-11 8-1-10 3-2-14 10-1-15 6-2-10 5-1-20 10-2-4 10-2-13 13-2-9 11-1-4 14-1-5 / 9-1-8 15-2-6 7-1-6 4-1-10 3-1-5 13-2-15 11-1-23 7-1-12 9-1-9 351d d. d d d da da di di ai ajia alou an Jangao Jangran anshi ao Si dé dé yixia ian ianhua ianshi ianying idi ifang ling long jOngtian jongxi lou ui ui uibigi uile luo ud jitt udshado 3. uzi 52 go » ot ” & % a-F Is a. os ic ic Ex aa G&G eB Yew & eH ae | BbRae HT BK gy WF AG xt xt RY AN iEe MT BM Bb Ak TAAd “11-1-20 9-1-4 13.2.5 /10-2-11 6-1-15 13-2-3 6-2-13 14-1-10 6-2-6 2-1-13 10-1-11 13-2-12 1-2-18 7-1-15 2-41-11 9-1-13 4-1-2 15-2-3 fangbian fangdong fangjia fangjian fangzi fangzii fashao fayan féi fen feng féng fén far fdjin fami © gang ganjing ganmao gao  ge gege gel gé gen gen geng gOnggong qi  gongsi gongzudo gongzud guang Hy | BAR “HIRE lil BF al RS RH AEH ‘oy Sy Bi 6-2-2 “1-1-2 9-1-10 “11-1-15 2-1-7 11-2-2 15-1-12 15-1-10 8-1-1] 7-1-4 14-1-3 6-1-8 11-1-10 11-2-13 6-1-17 14-1-9 7-2-3 10-2-12 15-1-13 10-2-10 8-1-18 2-2-10 2-2-6 10-1-4 11-1-21 8-1-3 15-2-11 14-2-9 8-2-11 9-1-7 12-1-13 12-2-1 12-2-8 9-2-10batinytey guanxin guidai Gigong Bowutyuan gui guo gudjia an 40 hao 40 hao 40 a 0 bu hao haocht ode o hdojiti bujian okan owan Aoxiang iE hén o hongye o oumian outian hua Hualian  uanying  hui HEARSE 3%, eae Eg RAR Be aE aR 8 rs ae RHE be BR > e Se ee me Sty At GBD B FAA AF ARAE “AF, “art “nF NB AEATR I, 1H eer te 48 Af ern “a “ait uk SR RR /15-2-15 8-2-3 EEE 95g 4-2-11 | 13-1-15 12-2-10 9-2-6 6-1-1 13-121 Lesson- Dialogue- Namber erat hui hui jia huigud huilai huiqi hu huoshi ji jl jia jia jian jian jiankang jiankang zhongxin jianmian jianyi jiao Jiao jidohuan jiaoshi  jiayou   jigjie jié jié jié jihua jihui jin jinnian jmtian eR Pos i 8h | RR KE BAK oie we ate BR BUF He 4A /11-2-8 15-2-22 9-1-2 | 13-1-3 “1L-I-17 8-1-2 81-16 353ai angiu janse Jaoban joshi ei é 354 WPrton el MMS (Orne a ce mM Gitte 4% El mt BE Re Km | hood ae RAs Kw oA DE RH KTV HR xx Be £8 bm se aa 4 4 PUR “KTV aR RK 4-2-5 ©9-2-15 1-L-l 12-1-3 (31-15 9-2-13 1-2-14 7-215 10-2-3 3-2-4 15-2-8 2-2-8 72-14 14-2-12 5-2-3 1-1-3 3-2-10 5-2-13 7-2-18 11-1-14 4-1-16 10-1-5 8-1-9 14-1-8 13-1-2 TA-2 5-2-4 1-1-5 3-1-11 10-2-15 4-1-4 2-2-7 4-2-6 13-2-4 12-1-20 14-1-2 Li Minghua liang li limian Lin lit liwt lou louxia liguan lixing @ ma Ma Antong mai mal mama man man zou mang manggud Maokong méi méi méi méi guanxi méi wenti  méi mén mian mianxian mingnidn mingtian mingzi oO na na Pee mrs cl (Oi re uae om SMR EH of i ‘Be & iets 2m Hf “ak + if at ith oh x # eT EF TRAE wet RAT TAT nay é By ei] is * if x 05 1g 1B 4 ft: eR 7 er WE om Bw rs % es te 3 WRK ia [4] tk ‘rio na % iti ah we Ae Wyse WR MK BF Be ‘= =e “as CO iret (i) 1-1-8 ele? 4-2-12 4-1-5 2-1-21 8-1-6 14-2-17 7-2-10 10-1-3 9-2-16 2-2-11 6-1-9 7-2-1 11-2-16 71-14 1-2-17 2-1-19 13-1-17 5-1-2 13-2-6 14-1-11 3-117 22-4 /15-1-16 -11-2-10Pinyin na/ nei na /  na gud /  gud ' nali nali Nali, nali name name nan nan nankan ne  néng ni ni ni hao nian nian nianqing nianshi nimen nin niurou  nit Oo pa pai pangbian péi péng pianyi piaoliang eo qi qian qian > aS SR SR HS ve Traditional | Simplified Perri ti Ge) : AB #222 38 =e RR B ay a ae 3 = ah a a 4 > ARAB, Characters HB ip ab FE] mE ys SEL ABER, Ag FB B WBA BA x Ate MEA We AU fie ts iL | 4-2-10 1-2-12 1-2-19 6-1-7 6-1-5 3-2-14 12-2-13 3-1-1 10-2-8 12-2-12 5-2-2 -2-9 4-1-19 4-2-8 -14 3-2-6 -1-23 2-1-2 2-1-6 3-2-10 2-1-19 -1-17 (223 (S-1-1 -14-1-16 9-2-1 5-2-5 10-2-1 6-2-16 15-2-7 6-1-20 4-2-13 2-1-6 8-2-4 41-3 42-16 be Dialogue- inca ei) qianmian ging qing qing jin  qiutian qu qunian e re ren,    san shan shang ci shang ge yu shangban shangdian shangke shangwang shanshang shao shé shéng shéng shéng  shéng shén shi shi sht shia shi’éryué di shide shihou ie a ae ie Pl RAE EE ae em £8 ZBI a8 TE a Re wR ail +aAB ea BAR iN FAK Fu AA mare EA HE ea J 4-1-7 -2-7 1-2-6 3-1-12 -2-16 4-2-2 6-1-13 4-2-16 0-2-18 2-1-18 6-2-9 6-1-21 4-2-9 6-1-4 5-1-6 2-1-17 15-1-11 13-1-1 13-1-19 12-2-4 1-2-6 1-1-6 12-2-11 14-2-6 5-1-18 14-1-18 1-1-21 7-1-10 355shijian shishikan shdudao shoujt shiv shifa shift shui shui shuigud shuijiao shud sudyi su si Bi tai tai hao le tai ké Taidong taifeng Tainan taitai Taiwan tamen tang taofang taoyan  ti tr tian tian tiandian tiangi Tianzhong  356 RET ABA BR we “aes RAR apa ry Ta) We By Fol +f fis Ay Mi 7K KR HSE ie LA ee ft he K KET REG BA ea) ep ih ‘12-114 72-12 11-2-14 4-2-3 2-2-5 7-2-13 81-14 15-2-17 15-1-18 10-1-1 15-1-20 5-1-5 5-2-6 62-11 /1-2-10 92-5 “42-4 “5-1-21 13-1-23 Pinyin ting ting tingshuG tong  tou tu tushiguan oO waidai waimian wan wan wan wanfan wang Wang  wangle wanglu shang wangqit wanshang wanshi rtyi wei weibd   wen wenti wd w06 jit shi women wtt wican Wiilong cha @ xia ci xia ge xingqi xiake aia cd iB UF iba ce Kt Wi me fay: ie & ok, THe ee Bie Sb ie Shit sb B Shit we St 8 B Be, BE a, OR aia tt te ERR EFF S(T) i (T) wy & PB WER PER BE Ae BFoE HRM % me BR ‘iplCBR qa an Aytt FE Atta PA ial Pa Pa) et Hi Hk PME Bea Bu} BeAr] z£ tt FR PE RK K 48) 234 eH FR Pik 1 14-2- 3-1-2 6-1-2 15-1-6 8-2-1 15-1-5 15-2-4 6-2-1 4-1-1 6-2-7 8-1-4 4-2-1 5-1-1 3-2-1 10-2- 1-1-3 13 3 5 8 5 7 5 14 13-1-6 8-1-1 3-1-6 3-2-3 320: 1-2- 4-1- 4-2- 7-1. 9-1- 7-2-4 5-1-7 9 16 1 4 = woMeO MT ita WSs PVCU MOT tite bath oer eee ee Dialogue Characters | Characters xian i % FE §12-1-5 @ xing #8 #8 3-2-7 yao & Bz 1-2-13 sing ig te 11-1-18 os z e pata xiang Ed 8 14-1-6 yao z Ea 42-14 xiang & & 10-1-6 yao 2 cid 14-2-4 *iansheng KE FE 1-1-13 yao wm 25 15-1-14 ianzal a IATE 6-1-16 yaoji i B 26 15-1-15 a & % 0-2-2 yaoshi £R BE 92-14 Me ean yé aD ip 9-2-8 xi 2) 3B “3H -1-7 yidian —@ — a 13-2-8 xidolongbao pH @ IN FEA, 5-1-19 . eae ' ' yiding ze iE 5-1-15 ee ht we 52-18 yi ar FR 10-2-5 ate shes ete aca yigong —# —3t A1-l wiatian BA BR 425 yihou Du bha 12-116 een aes ae ete se ae lam otto yijing eee a4 11-2-3 xiaya 7m i: FR j 142-14 pings fe 1% 9-2-9  BHF peVET 3-1-18 a , , Xibanya wén BPEFR pHPEAIC 3-1-13 na ee a _ _ yinhang SRAT ART 7-1-9 wie 8 oe Teall yin aA py 10-2-16 xiexie at at ata -1-22 yinyue Me ae 313 xigua Om PR 0-1-9 yiqi —#e — ite 3-2-13 a a is aR 1-2-4 yigidn wait bhai 10-1-12 xiuan ae EK a8 yi Be Ete 1511 xn a i Saas yiyang —k — Fe 13-1-14 xing ae ite -1-15 yizhi -a —#H 15-1-2 xingat Bu a aa you i at 15-2-12 ea aE wh 4-1-7 you x RM 8-1-13 a ff fi] lel 4-2-8 you # a 2-1-10 ee SER 3-217 you kong BE BE T-A-16 xionedi UR Fa 2-2-12 en a id ‘co ae he RE 51-19 you shihou FMR AYR 9-1-12 sawing ee ea 2-115 you yidian HB A 5-2-16 wid a me 32-11 you yisi ABS ARS 7-2-22 xué a eH /12-1-12 haa ee ou ile xué Be abe 62-4 youming aa Ae oT —— an me 612 yOuxian dianshi HREM ABM = 11-2-17 — Ee aus 12-1-8  BR wig 3-1-9 357Pata TE youydngchi yu yuan yue  yundong Yushan yushi ybyan yttyan zhongxin zai zai zai zai zai zal zaijian zao yidian zaoshang zé zé zé le zé zhan zhang Zhang Yijiin zhao zhao zhaopian zhaoxiang zhe / zhé zhé ci zheli N hé 358 Be ee RR AR FAs SE SE SET SER i py SSP a | 4 oh a ss a ad 6-1-3 6-2-5 7-2-1 8-2-6 _11-1-19 12-2-14 7-1-17 15-1-21 3-1-18 8-1-5 13-1-5 15-2-19 3-1-20 8-1-15 Zz Zz Zz Zz Zz Zz z ong Zhonggud Ongtou  ongwit Sumo ht hu ang ji a Ziji zoultr zu zui zuihao zuijin zud Zuo ZU0 zuo shén zudbian zuofan zuotian zudyou zugia x “saith ff A P ca i P ch | ASA hak Px ae Pe pe BR JAAR OE fE we R B® a we Hap ei TH = ¥ ae qe EM HERR #8 mil aR bo at wet Bat BE jae AB Ae fk BUR fet ke ei BR AUR WER ER hb ‘EA RR | LER '14-1-14 4-2-1 5-1-12 4-2-7 41-11 8-2-10 8-1-7 “32412 7-1-7 3-1-1 10-2-17 13-2-13 11-2-11 13-2-5 7-2-16 5-2-7 11-1-9 11-I-1 5-1-9 15-2-23 | 7-2-9 2-1-8 ; 8-1-1 12-2-3 3-1-22 “1Led-5 5-2-8 5-2-1 13-1-16 3-1-14me ae on Lesson- 4 OPEC amine niet Traditignal e A English definition (Ora tu Con me Teta Co es are a eT COV: Ye Co uo MO eres Tu Corus re - © bathroom BE WE i 11-1-7 tobe iz tt 1-1-6 a bit earlier FB HoH 15-121 * to be able to, can e = 5-2-10 (a) few & Ju 15-2-5 : . beautiful & = 6-1-9 a little BB Ai 5-2-16 . om TONE ecause Ay A] Y |-2- a little, some —B —A 13-2-8 eet _ ‘oy 511 ee 5-1- about the same ZRS ERS 8-2-14 : S ' _— before LAAT Dat 10-1-12 0 access the internet, touse the intemet (+ ba (42-9 to begin, to start BAe Feb 72-15 afternoon Fe FE 7-2-5 birthday 48 ! 4H 13-1-1 afterwards Dee Wa 2-2-5 blue £é He 10-2-15 again # cn 2-2-14 book = ti 2-2-5 all, both ap #8 2-1-13 both...and... XR x 8-1-13 already Ce aa 1-2-3 a bowl of a ci 5-1-17 also a th 3-1-12 boy-, male- § gg 10-2-8 altogether —# —dk 4-1-1 brothers A She 2-2-12 ancient times aK TAt 8-2-3 business AS ARE 12-2-4 and, as well as Fo Ail 3-1-8 . / busy te t 7-2-10 annoying atm WR 4-2-7 heb ' to be busy, to be appetite go #o 5-1-7 engaged uw Ae Ae 7-2-21 approximately AB EA 3-1-16 but, however TA ape 5-2-3 ae about, AB Ki 9-1-9 but, however 1a (eg 8-1-12 roba , 5 ° to buy gq x 4-1-5 arrive Bi] Bl 1-1-12 _— #7 WT ann the wa: ‘] o 5 to ask PA fa] 7-2-19 i" T, ke Se Iie 14-2-17 e. Take care. 8 12 -2- at He tE 6-2-5 u 7 ~ aunt, here a polite e term for a friend’s ; a me ; 26 3 -2- mother regardless of tae fe 2-2-2 cable TV ARER FHM 11-2-17 age cake FH BE 13-2-11 autumn (season) FA FRR 14-1-12 to be called, i-e., to have the first name oy nu 1-1-16 © : back 4a jam 6-1-12 calligraphy Sik IK 7-2-13 bank SRAT RT 7-1-9 can, to be able to fe, fie 4-2-8 baseball HeBR peak 3-1-7 tol be careful, totake bay om basketball Ge TE BR 3-1-1] tocatch/haveacold m&@ wee 15-1-13 359to celebrate cell phone certainly, of course character cheap, inexpensive China Chinese language Chinese last name, common in Taiwan a city in southwestern. Taiwan | class classmate classroom clean clothes coffiee cold to come to come back comfortable company complement marker to be concerned about continuously, all the way i convenience store convenient to cook correct, right could (possibility) could (possibility) country cuisine cup oO Da-an (name of a KTV named after a district in Taipei, where Shida is also located) 360 FH ER 4 oR z $ ee (EH P ‘p Px esc Hk #K a] ar 7% if me ae RE aE Hit Fy RUB AeA morse one R K BR lel PR aril al Al 4 8 Mls Kay a —H RAR ARIE he Hite HAR BR q x way Ae ay Aye R Ee] 2c cS cs KE KE (81-17 7-2-14 8.2. 3-2- 6-2-17 10-2-12 10-2-5 1-2-14 14-1-2 1-1-5 13-1-3 8-1-14 12-1-13 §-2-9 15-2-15 15-1-2 8-1-20 6-2-2 5-2-8 10-1-11 3-2-10 §-2-13 12-2-10 3-2-16 4-1-6 7-1-12 dad date, day of a month to decide delicious dessert dinner disposal marker do what to do, to engage in doctor Don’t mention it. It’s my pleasure. don't (used in imperatives) dormitory downstairs to drink e easy to to eat egg the end of December — with enthusiasm even (more, less, etc. evening, night every, each everyone Excellent. Great. to exchange to exercise expensive extra fine noodles @ to fall ill family (members) far fast to feel, to think few in number “sl RE 4%, aH AB te BET 48h ee AA A Be ORF % et “Bese A 3 if fit ti BE WB EE, BAB Tie BEF §-2-14 -6-2-11 -6-1-18 | 1-2-2 2-2-6 3-2-14 3-2-7 4-1-18 3-1-12 4-2-9 3-2-3 7-2-11 4-2-10 §-1-21 3-1-10 3-1-4 4-2-1] 3-2-6 $-1-11 2-1-4 6-1-6 8-1-9 3-1-15 5-1-6PotalrimeloininieGyed film fine, well to finish to finish class first five to flow for for here for, on behalf of to forget fragrant friend from front fruit in the future © game, competition gate, entrance general measure word to get to get settled down, to get used to i gift, present girl-, female- to give to give it a try, to try ‘oe and see what happens» to give someone a ride on/ in a vehicle, e.g. motorcycle, bicycle or car to go to go back, toreturn | go home to go out to go to class to go to work to go/come to a 2 av TR Wai LR HE | (9-1-5 1-1-14 7-2-8 7-2-4 12-1-5 22-14 15-1-3 41-13 4-1-19 12-1-14 13-1-6 —10-1-6 6-1-20 7-1-6 6-1-10 10-1-1 12-1-16 7-2-1 13-1-17 2-2-10 15-1-16 11-2-4 13-2-1 9-2-1 10-1-4 12-2-15 8-2-6 3-1-19 11-1-17 15-2-22 9-1-8 6-1-21 12-1-18 12-1-17 Pera ert to go/stay with somebody, to ea accompany Goodbye. AR good-looking tA grades Be at oO half + happy Fs happy RA Happy Birthday. ARH hard to, difficult to SE to have A to have a fever ERE to have a holiday BAB to have a meal 6 AR to have ataste, try it, oboe a to have free time RE to have fun it to have to, must AE he, him head health health center hear that here, this place High Speed Rail (HSR) ea home, house | R homework WR to hope ae hot Bh hot (spicy) mR hotel TRAE hour 43 5G hour a) BE house BF how 6 FS WA ZB Ts Fes PUR 46 RR we  Babe fe 7-1-17 2-1-16 12-1-11 7-2-6 10-2-3 1341-2 13-1-19 12-2-12 /2-1-10 15-1-12 9-1-10 6-2-10 10-1-15 7-1-16 “B14 71-8 1-210 “15-15 “15-29 15-221 61-23 6-2-3 “81-18 ‘21-5 9-1-7 121-15 ‘Ael-7 5-2-4 /10-2-6 81-7 /15-2-18 (2-1-7 8-1-5 361How about it? How does that sound? What do you think? How about...? How does that sound? How are you? Hello. How come? how long how many how much, how many however, but hundred I, me I’m sory. icy if to be inflamed inside to install insurance interesting, fun to be interesting, to be fun on the Internet Jt would be best../ (You) should::- It’s not necessary. Japan job, work just now @ Karaoke keep up the good work to kick kind, type kitchen 362 SBR BE ARE ay > mF BY HN we RW Gt as BA Le A KTV Ao ite BR LEA AE SUE GA BA aby JL z Aik A HK YAS uk BE ey a (i Bar at HEE Pea BE Sekt SAT w 1-2-18 15-2-13 9-2-14 15-1-10 6-2-8 11-2-11 15-2-10 3-1-16 7-2-22 8-1-19 15-2-23 15-2-20 1-2-16 12-2-8 7-2-3 7-1-2 12-1-22 3-1-13 4-2-7 1-1-4 e andlord language language center arge ast month ast time ast year ater to laugh, to smile to learn, to study left (side) ibrary ight repast, snack to like to listen iving room to be located at long (time) ong time no see to look for @ lunch : to make a phone call | aman from Japan aman from Taiwan a man from the Republic of Honduras: a man from the US mango many Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) may (permission) May all your wishes come true. May everything go your way. & i& SM cca AR SEARR FE TES BP a Rae 62 EAR eR g tee mes 48 A BFE BAR 1-1-2 Be 3-1-9 BSP — 12-1-21 K 4-1-10 EAA 0-2-18 LK 4-2-16 Be 2-2-2 ae 7-2-20 ae 0-2-2 a 3-2-11 Fels 1-1-5 Pe te 6-2-15 NA 5-1-8 BK -2-8 We 3-1-2 2e FF 1-1-3 4E 6-1-3 K 2-1-3 HAAN 13-121 be /12-2-7 ER 7-2-2 His 1-1-23 HPy— 2-2-1 EME “12 xi) 2-1-2 EFM 113 eR 0-1-3 zg 2-41-11 wie 8.27 ATL (72-18 ARSE Re 132-17 Aw — 13-2-16English definition May I ask you..., Excuse me,-* measure word for bags, packages etc. measure word for cell. phones measure word for Chinese money Measure word for day. measure word for flat | objects (e.g., paper, tickets) measure word for houses, rooms, etc. measure word for minutes measure word pieces of food meat, cake) measure word for times, occurrences measure word for year measure word for buildings measure word for restaurants, shops, etc. medicine medium meet to meet, to see to microwave minute to miss (someone) Miss, Ms. modification marker mom money month of a year (comparatively) more morning most Byetcnoie ly Coir etu con) oP R AR R sR a SESS R & & i pan} BeBe BE Simplified CO ietucony kk aK fal oy Ss b> ft St ust a TT a> ee Ss = & 1-1-20, 15-2-16 4-2-1 41-16 7-2-12 2-1-15 11-1-13 11-1-10 10-1-5 15-2-6 12-1-2 6-2-13 most (of), mostly motorcycle, scooter mountain ona mountain, in the mountains movie Mr. a multi-storey building music © name name ofa city on the eastern coast of Taiwan name of a must-see place in Taipei to visit for fine tea and scenery name of one of the major cities on the south eastern coast of Taiwan National Palace Museum near to need new New Year New York news next time next week next year night market No need to stand on formalities, i.e., It’s my pleasure. No problem. noodles noon not aR oe ot te Rs Ke F 18 2 HA Rit Rob BR RPL RE 3 Pe os & R tO BA Hee CE) i me 3-2-5 1-1-13 6-2-14 3-1-3 2-2-4 6-1-22 9-2-16 9-1-14 8-2-9 6-2-1 12-1-8 4-2-2 14-1-7 14-1-16 14-2-8 7-1-13 9-1-11 14-1-11 9-2-8 13-1-22 71-14 5-1-2 7-1-7 1-2-11 363Pere ed not Nota problem. not bad (here) to not like, to fear not to look good not well now OQ OK OK OK ocean o’clock often oily, greasy old older brother older sister only, merely only, merely Oolong tea opportunity or | or (used in a question). to order (meals) to order (something in advance) outside eo painful parents a particle indicating a realization i a particle used in addressing people, especially over the phone to pay person, people 364 MM a 18 A AF RA HF STE 11-2-16 5-2-12 5-2-5 15-2-2 5-2-17 6-1-16 3-1-23 4-1-17 2-1-9 6-1-1 7-1-1 3-1-10 15-2-12 4-2-5 2-2-6 2-1-18 L-l-l 14-1-14 1-2-15 10-1-13 8-1-16 3-2-8 5-1-16 13-2-3 6-2-7 15-1-6 14-1-9 13-1-4 11-2-1 11-2-13 1-2-7 a person’s “color” (said of the face when healthy or sick, pleased or angry etc.) pharmacy, drug store photo to pick sb up place to plan to to plan to to play (ball games) please Please come in! poor, bad pork knuckles pretty problem, question progressive aspect verb; in the process of doing something oe rain to rain to read really really must, definitely’ really, truly to receive recently, lately red red maple leaves to remember to rent rent (for aroom or a house) restaurant to return to one’s country to ride right (side) room Traditional | S{mplified CO irre Tuo cee O return) me hrf, RA 2 Jal HR fea & Be 3 ST We we ite il iT 47 if ie itt z Fd Be ep Fahey TRE Ge PAR (a) feat & te ® iW Fr Fy AE aH a & —# ie Bw SLAY We Bi] WB) Rt SR ae 2, ak arn a4 inte 4a fl Ifa SAB FRI wT ae Fl BE Aig Fe fe la re Dialogue- Number 15-2-1 15-1-15 2-1-12 1-1-9 6-1-15 9-1-3 12-1-1 3-1-5 1-2-1 2-1-22 15-1-8 13-2-5 2-1-6 11-2-5 7-2-1 14-2-1 14-2-14 2-2-8 $§-1-3 5-1-15 6-1-14 11-2-14 7-2-9 10-1-8 14-1-13 13-1-7 11-1-1 11-2-2 $-2-2 9-1-2 8-2-4 11-1-6 l1-1-15Lesson- BB eLite ye) Mims eeya) bi eret Traditional | Simplified ls aga reln eatariban Characters | Characters Melee Be Characters | Characters ae Number e so 38 B kA '5-1-11 so (vel ap WZ 13-1-11 “y * me mt — in JERR 3-1-14 soccer 4 ~1- scary Ta wt 42-12 . sometimes FER FAI AR 9-1-12 scenery, landscape ALK ARE 6-1-8 : : . soon Cd RR 14-1-8 scholarship ee Wee Ge 2-1-10 a sorry AMER RGR 11-2-15 school BR PEAS 6-1-2 soup, broth wm DB 5-1-10 to see a doctor AR Ei 5-2-8 Spai oat PGE 13-1-18 Et It? a to see, to watch aA a 3-2-4 Ce ; the Spanish language HEF PHYEF IL 13-1-13 to seem to be, to . ns appear to be (often JER WIR 127 special ER 455 Ful 9-2-11 used to take the edge aa to spend (time or | ae se off of a comment) money) (fe 16 12-1-9 self acd AG 5-2-7 spring (season) BRR BR 14-1-5 to sell x % 4-2-12 station ab aK 8-1-15 sentence final particle °%§ ne -1-8 to stay ke E 10-2-17 sentence final particle We -2-9 i i P " 6 steamed buns with at Ay. 41-8 sentence-final particle Ma 3-1-21 meat stuffing filling - i still, additionally it a 9-2-6 a ~~ a ie j 101-10 stinky tofu (fermented . ; RGR REG | 5-1-20 sentence-final particle “ap 3.2.9 tofu) for suggestion stomach, abdomen AL-F ALF 15-2-3 sentence-f nal ‘ine th to stop t ica 14-2-13 particle indicating the iow speaker’s sense of 7 Lf 4-2-6 store, shop Ba 6-2-9 certainty store-owner, boss ZAR 4-1-4 she, her es Be 9-2-5 a storey, a floor pE 6-2-12 shop, store B& J 5-1-14 student PEE 6-2-4 short (height) $& 52 10-2-9 to study eS 12-1-6 should MH PIR 9-2-9 to study ep 12-1-19 (by the) side, nextto iF Sin 6-2-16 suggestion ZEW 9-2-7 to sing 8 Hh ne a 7-1-3 suite ER 11-1-16 sisters Mo oH aK 2-2-13 summer (season) BR 14-2-5 to sit ae AL 2-1-8 supermarket te 11-1-8 to ski ae wes 14-1-4 to be surnamed ‘a tee 1-1-15 to sleep Be bie i, 15-1-20 sweet (taste) itt 10-1-7 to sleep ae i 15-2-17 to swim WiFi 3-1-9 slow ea & 8-1-6 swimming pool Wei 6-2-18 small vy ay 4-1-12 e snot, nasal mucus, a a gk Bok “15-14 , ays running nose Taiwan ae ms ines , L118 to snow +S ke “14-1-17 we) ane to take a. te 9-2-4 365to take (pictures) this time BK Bue /14-2-15 to take a photo 48 H this year DE AE 13-2-2 to take a rest | thousand FF + '4-2-16 to take by, to travel by throat “BB nie 15-1-9 take out, to go i to throw up, to vomit ok i 15-2-4 to take, to require (42-14 (train, bus) ticket = #& ae S110 tall } -10-2-10 time 8% Pe] Fe} Te) 12-1-4 oe a drink) to ee p08 ners tired ! gz BR 12-1-20 to “ai ay 5.2-15 taxi ath ihe 8-2-13 a a ws 11-1-21 tea ® R 1-2-3 to a xt 13-2-12 to teach Esa A 5-2-14 to aR aR 15-2-11 teacher ee Nii 2-2-7 today BR DR 3-2-2 teahouse Re A 9-2-12 together —#e — je 3-2-13 telephone Es ig 11-1-20 a “WK AAR 3-1-17 ten thousand 3% A 4-2-15 aa k Kk 42-4 tennis AR : ba BR 3-1-6 toward, to eed te 0-2-14 (more...) than be 828 tradition, customs 1$ ER 3-2-9 Thank you. 1-1-22 train Ke IKE 8-1-2 that aa to travel “eat ete 9-1-6 that place, there ARE AB 6-1-7 to treat sb to sth e i¥ 0-1-14 That’s right. A Fathi 5-1-18 to try ik it 2-2-11 you very kind of KER KEN 13-1-23 tuition 2% ee 2-1-12 the day after A { wy ee ei ae tomorrow ! BA ala two oy iy 2-2-15 the same, alike 31-14 typhoon EIR, aR 4-2-3 then 9-2-15 © and then 1-1-19 umbrella re a $14.22 then i 2-213 university Ke KE /12-1-7 then, in that case ap 1-2-10 ' : therefore, so PRL 5-2-6 @ these ‘igab jecutes 0-2-19 vacant, empty ie aS 1-1-14 ay for people feted lett) en ae iy + joa things, stuff ka i 6-26 completed action to think “8 #0 1-1-18 aed ea te oA thid i ix LP very de aE 8-1-11 (said of self on the : vicinity, near Me BE 6-1-17 phone) This iss/he ate = FALE 3-1-20 Vietnam a ind 3217 speaking. : to visit (an institution). BR Bm 8-2-2 this kind (of) atk BRE 2-2-9 366Traditional | Simplified | - pare MWe iC Met neice COT eto coe Oe besCa Cae (oes wa be Tn) OTe tateliy peo DE Tilia a woman from the US. 4 40 & | AME 3-2-1 a woman from to wait for # = 1-2-9 Vietnam RAK | PRASE 1-1-1 ‘o walk j a8 ae 19 to work Xf Ite 1221 to wander around, to — ; es i 7 be i 2 to write & | 7-2-17 look around fe i 9-2-10 wn a 7 to want to & Be -2-13 @ to want, to need i & ge 4-1-9 xiaolongbao, e.g., i: 1 aa A 2. small meat and ng As (ene oe ea ~ e caea cabbagefilled steamed bee HE ieee water ak 7K 5-1-18 buns water heater Buk 8 1-2-6 o watermelon UII 0-1-9 yellow ‘#6 Re, 10-1-2 we, us Fe -1-10 ae a ! i eS ry fi -]- towear,toputon ¥ ee 0-2-4 yy ; Rea cca t : ! esterda: RK a -2-1 weather KA 4-1-1 ened * vx 7 : fa K -1-4 week BI 9-1-1 ue in "3 i you (female) ae wr 3-2-6 weekend SAK 3-1-1 : . you (honorific) B fe 2-2-3 welcome | ig a -1-19 ' 7 . { ; ou (plural aR sq »1-1-17 well known, famous 4% AZ 5-1-7 you (plural) en ii t , You’re welcome. REAR REA 1-1-22 wet i ME 14-2-6 ‘ 310 } i aE 13-2-1 what Ab TB Ire 2-6 young som E48 EE a : ! Qt 4 10-2- What’s wrong? SBT EAT 15-2-19 RAE aL hh a i i ounger sister 2-1-19 when | BME | A HE 7-1-10 cme! aa h : sae oye 6-15 Yu Shan (Mount where ABA FB ie . Jade), tallest zu il 14-1615 which | ‘WB -2-12 mountain in central 7 Tai Which country? SB iB 219 aiwan _ i = who a ife 21-17 why | Att Atta 4-2-17 wife RA KK 0-2-7 will e & 1-2-8 will not do ‘RAT IME 8-2-12 will, be goingto Pa 14-2-4 wind ee Rl 14-1-3 window ‘aP an 10-2-13 winter (season) AR AR 14-1-10 to wish (somebody i happiness, good luck, | #% ih 13-2-13 etc.) with BR PR 8-1-3 a woman from Taiwan KEE kine 2-1-1 367eae ee Text in Simplified Characters FASTA RIOR! EA AAMITA? => Coie ASE. ile YR HE BRAS “DOH 9? ze al: A, OR BX WT PEER A? A =: MN. Ww R Be Pell. 1 0: ROAR BKM A OR. HR BK ash. aR te: Cet RS ENA. & a] : . a HT Pe a B : x ES. A: AN BK TT M: eRe. Fe REE, MY FPIC. z al: MK BEM tk 4A? aR HE, SATRE. GM AM) OK ATS FAR, FT ERR OAT YK, YR WE? ie x al: HR A 47 WER, th HB ARR. fF 4. ai WB | A: KR TG BH EP IR wT. fe: A AS 0 ]: 8 Bk, 4 ib sR, F x. Ww. Re. wk eA RO enn ee A eK HK AR. GA BK IB che tee Mil! FFL, UMNAA A We? , AR &: fh RK BA A, = mB OE, re mm A? 4 E: OK ME RIN KA BB, GR oF? F x: K # FH A Se: hf My! aE, FEI, YR AN EO ohne? 4 =: *& BA RH BRE A wy? F MC: WU! Be AN Me OME, FR BERK MB AE. OA =: RE BS. Any, KRM A. y #: RN @ A awe! TR gh oe A Se: AF Ml! A way poe. EEE HARA i 5: hk BOR B ie me wei? n= A &: tt, RAN HK Me ters X. A Bs ERROR. TA HE! , 2 ff: RB BT! EEA, iael—HS DR? [They enter Yijun’s house.] paz eB: WA! OR BE oR? a Por gt ee z a]: if, WU kK. KR A WR SB RH 2 WIA WK Se OK WA? 1 2. RRA MR BH aa 8A fe: — M A OME. PY HS 2 ff: kK MH RUE. R Bike em ER: RK MP Oe bh ? a 10,2 BA fe. KOM. AF if ee hie is B. WE BR ttkh KER EE w. ER: REY. Talal Shi IE AA? al: Ue RA HR WE 6A fe: Shae, TE BD? — = WR: Es ie F W+, —2t -A Beh, ak aa BONS. LM EM ith wx ea : 7 fe. We AN AL o AA RH PaseAh OUI, in LF, UK HK! HK! KR! WH AB. a? ik MM tA AF? A #: RX YX FU AIA T, BWA. 1 A: Fe NY th—. A OR OT cy BB. BA fe: We AA OK OM F fh FHL? BA fe. MK BE BE NY Be fh AE SNH, A =: fe A th Ae EM. {hI BEX Af. AA fe. OB FP FHL ie af, # Bret H — Me AB 46 9 99 99 og WRAL ARAN A BRR RI KB Sb? Ho 2 m4. AS OP SPRL A (PR. - KX BH | RRA AS A, KA HS te. LF 2. 368MA +AmA HA fel: AMR ARMREE SS. ce ‘ta 2: KRABI, SW MARLAS, Al Sie iam Air. nD a =: RS AM A A Ae IN Zo fe; ie WY] ) PAT. NEA, RB GR a 1B ENE. i ry FLEARK KTV fi a Ey a 5 e A R: WR BK MG ta? & i: AX, weep? fe: EWA itl. FPA ffm, ia tlh AFM Ao 8, 2 KTV AK. RAM AILS TER A &: KA tng, K i AB MZ. 22 KTV Lif. mA OE, RM ORAS IN EA a, Oe a): PEILREKIV ? WHA? Nie EZ, EAR? A 8: RESP, BE. BBR B z: K tT! wife? Wo OS RN RE. EBA KM. Of S]: RABE, WHER T. Free! A A REM, FURR XE BOR, FRAY (ROA aK A HER MR mR AIT MD MR AMG, eet Aiantiene— lenin? Ale A A BR ee ae : 2 R th Hi ek, Hib wk Ac Mig, SOs REE BAR EE REAM? A &: VK WOR hk BAR? a oa SO: Bk 9 Rh. Ms ae Hit mB? = A =: &. KI fit 2 ik Aa z » WK, epee RMT? R a): Khe BM WZ Hi. We aTLLa B32 yy PR, PRL. URUB? A 3: WI, ike Sh AK, BR RR. z oT, REPU EERE ERR R a): ef Ml) YY a. pRB Je FG 1, 2 Eva thie x &F ee SR By? aA (iN FB on 5K, FLATS, ERO A LAIR z FARIA RE? 2 fF: WitiPB Mee RBS. g x: ea we FRET, THRE ARA BNE: HAMA BECEMB A? ize Nie? = y3 9 ge Dl: A AGE. ANAT ETE SEN ez Pe: Bile EAT AS Aa A032 an CE: WE? PEWMB— ER. mn: RAMI. & a): FEN, HINARI, A, Al BSA “MRR FEI LETT FE #re+e8 an, RAAT. BAN Rte se! = 2 Bl: AM! RMR ARIE OME co MF. feRE 2 ; a. thE: ANAK, RARER A GST. OR: RAMP RMA, BTA LR. aR EL RAH? = wo Bs RAMA K ES. ; vers sein. AR HE: RARE, BOS Sk, AP REC BE BR a): WN ARE ! ae : Pann ; an Wr UE a ER AE SRA FH 5 lA: eI, IRI, A ATE By hy oe Al Br hak 7 | an x: eR QE AE ZEOM LITE? AA ERA bt, (AAR MIR AF iA #8: CFR. #REMAAAIE. as Boer = = BE dds FESS = on HE: J Ni ZEB BSE SE z B}: MEME? AA Be ART IT 2 ee bk 4 1 2. H, BEARS. BB fe, Cera, PRR bak ae EF a AB BT LA 369ME, KATHE! MRA, ANNE. A €: ER. BOR, mE. 4 n= oo XE: i, WY}. [taking a bite] BAH. at a BA, WABI, ALAM HL? ae tesa (Oa Fk ff), nu : BFA, » WSO? A SE, RRR, ZCI, 2 el; REM ELS MAE eve. fa? ’ an 2 UP i ASB AAR & PB CH ZR a oo OE: Wey ve Te? SD: AMA, URIS BAG? A HLL RL GUAR S UPN AR. sl E: He EAE? $0 Es RUA AEA, LAER EEKT & a] : Es Bes PY LA ABS SEA E A =, Bigg Rib eee. : i -E: BEGMA, RAE A. mE: i, sn ae nexewnre FO ® RAT, RANI. a]: ATT, AMARA. Uy REAL TERE x _ iT pty ij VWIAE he in Ks RUT! RMAE. MMLC AMER OR HE. RAC KAN deren, es 02 1 Fh. (REET. UAT, BRO RLIRIA NOIR H z fw: KS RH. UR ISE ARR IFUs | OMAN ict BH AC? Bs FRIST. FAC RUDE EAR ETB tt fp — ERA ARASH’ Re, RITA. SPE NY Rite? a 1 eh, BRIM BET A, RM AE AUB IB _ ap ARE, AR SRR RARE? Te PRM AO, ORL py ah GRR. IRENA, RCL KE, 7 ey a pene AR 4. BLANEY BCH AE BENS 2 ey BATS GE RED IK yah, WR AEERIN ALB, BT DLT TRA S]: FARIRAN AC HH Le . oh. REM. EAA Sb? A AE, RURAL ARSE HE Bl]: AA. OTA MY RAEI — Hh: ROTEL. BUM, ee? ERE REBT ; a] : a AIRER SUR, AIRE , cas With BHR OH? mR: MORE, Oi, BULGE, RAB. Bl: IX-SAAN FF K. TA oR: JOH, Writ, iE. h: EBA? B &: RRLST, REEL, GUAR. Bl: AMES. AK. 1: BPA. 5 A iz i; ZE BR: SRI T, | PA AT ABI, EB ae feneomen 4 : WEA IME m2 AR HE, RAR SOBA 2 oR _ 1 ch, BASE. HAT AR? BS a fist tal, EE A, RUC ATH. MINA AEM in. Fee ATL E Rang? 1 eB: WN, baa tt A BF eth 2? BR ‘Seen, ommmmacnns AE, ORIG HI. GALE IA. 132 1 A SUARB HERE AS LE BE AF ? 4 K: HAA, BT HBA UK. ARH, ORAL LL SANS. HELL RBI. = 1 ch, MARK. Bevis Hab aes. fixie HE, AEARUP? é Es OR, BARRE, Poh, RARER, Mile ARE, RAMI RR ATE, BEER iSite ds. EISEN AL L032 oh, RIE T | aBha B &: REBT, BN. MMT wy? iO: ART, A, AB, Bok BH Bet 4 PEAR. EE SVS AVR RIA Be SRRAL EE. OTANI? wee a ee . in Ee ANE Hy LOUIE? ae a 370an HE: kf, FRAERAE MK. PREF XL B MRP RAF BH RB. LEAT te LOG 2 SB: REA, Wet PE ME: RAL. WITLI AB, RAI MO, AEA. na? x BS): WRARAET T | Bea) Ce ab BO TE We ? B mk: WL, AMBAAHE. 16 Bs MRR PR, MAMMA BA. aE: HEH, WA. sl: AWUL? i6 B: HRA. \ ier 5 a]. pA ee ie bas AE he FEES, REGees anny? g 2, RAE RII SHE. eT = a 2 fl. HA, BNR EA He, P:R, MUMIA ES A moe 3c? thi. Bl: Fifeo ; (8 -B: WL, HY I IRA ALY. Bs AAR A HOM Tal? zl. WN! BORD, Se ASM easel A & a]: REEBR PbS, BSW AS, A. Pi Dias 2 He 1A Bs UAE A? ATR AT ARNE ZR DE? hs IGE TE AR > | zl: Bt Aawng. Bz LM, AMR K Ea BSE, BA Bs RUA TINA ME. SP Se BREST. URME? a. SP BOA A Be AE OS wi] EBT AY ze fel: BARE A RL AMNG x LE I HH? BD: RITES AME? th Be MWB BALES, Rat, BLE MR IMESE : KE, 2a REM. AGL AE A ARG IKE FR HT gz SB): Ar BER Wa A BX AU HA HEE. gz a]: MBA, Met Ane (trAawe? Ps KALLE LET, FIRE. 18 -B: FROME, NRE. SRA T gz BS): FMT] — ike DO ene! AE A ERE. i R a] : Mi STE» . 18 : ial, BUPRAEH ROR, J SPOR, RSE A x, a FEAT Za IESE GIS _L VERY? IA B: Ae PUKE RR. JSR. ob Hh. ME, ROBES CET. ee tae FL 5, BAP AAMAS a] BEA OLE? tat ar H: AWRMA ARS AMER. MAE BANMBA BL L. EReaa KAA4! SS. RIUM a eee OO MT, WlAILUS, TWEET? ci =. REN, BARMAN T mM FE. GMA, RRBSKUIERY. G fe. WERTH? chs ANGE, CRE AIT ECE a1 BRI FR G2 4. MEMS ES. KER. HRV? A Ss. REM ER, BRA. Fea RS Tue? ch, SE WERE 2 a Ee: WBA. RR RS+OAIHA. FS A =: MARRRAME PI. me, RMA LIBS. Hh. REET | ABBA ae AT LAE MLIT A HE, RAYS. REL BEE ARK. an z: woe He ie Ayan mn ca fF Ho 4, RAE RACAL ST EW). NI BREESE + RR 1h, RAURIE, RRR, ROUSE IPL ae ae ME REST MEST. 1 mA. a a a 5p ae ish 3 A AD BENG, 2? Biel. J, BALE. BTU, rit BE A ee eee ee ues RASG ei? Hi Bi . Ae TRB BRA, BAU G AIEDK ho , BRAM. Kit, ROMER ES 2 fl REART! RAT. mimes Bs BORAT ARB, AEST We. ° 18 -B. SOAS! SAMO, MBA Hots 371a ze fel: Wwe, Meee. MT AAA AA es UR, AERA, A Bee? HEE ECHR ARE. iO: hiner a ALE AFIS 7 4, an =: AH. PREET ULM i aD, SLE fie AB : ARRBKT. ath ERFGS To mo oF: KREAMKT. AB fe: KBRERRMA GH. KORA te, PARA IRA, WUT ARATE on Se: El! OB ABE. ATR. AB fe. MTA, RRMA MA LiKe K, BKB Dd. an E: PBRKNGA LAMA AT Ai‘(ti ES: E,W on : KT! Shinn We, FEM. AR ES BARA. TBE. FEBPA\ exam — BE: AN SH, ROR AN AFAR? wo OE: R-HWiB7k, KWH, SORA. ta FRG AD A AENS,. E& 4: KMBAT? on EE: GAD. LRAT. E& 4: RABUN. MMA ARR. on E: WMREWATAM? & : ti — mR, AE, PIRATE A IRo on HE: wl eng 4g? Ee +: B, weAweEeA. OB: REN. TANITA IIR? = +: BAT, SK, SKA, BA it, RiRRAL. » Bae. 7? WAIXAHES ALF RA EEAR, M2 T RPG iL, UF LIK. SAAR, RAB, ARE? o REGIA ER RI FERAL BAER PU. ABEL RAF, WERE. : WMS. RUBS 25 Key BRET J on : (AM SA FING? R a): RARE AAS. WERE, RAE ST, AB ER an #: tf. MACBZ Wb. WM, UKM AR Be GE AB AUNZ R fe): WR (an PIR Ja) ME: BORGIT. SEMA E AH? AT nay? 372